<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>An Examination of the Testimony of the Four Evangelists</title>
      <author><name reg="Greenleaf, Simon">Simon Greenleaf, LL.D.</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="2">Edition 2</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>January 17, 2011</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">34989</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2011-01-17">January 17, 2011</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Dianna Adair, Jeff G., David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This book was produced from scanned images of public domain
            material from the Google Print project.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">An</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Examination of the Testimony</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">of the</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Four Evangelists,</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">by the Rules of Evidence Administered</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">in</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Courts of Justice.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">With an Account of the Trial of Jesus.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">By Simon Greenleaf, LL.D.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Dane Professor of Law in Harvard University</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Second Edition</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Revised and Corrected by the Author.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">London:</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">A. Maxwell &amp; Son, 32, Bell Yard, Lincoln's Inn;</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">W. Smith, 113, Fleet Street;</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Hodges &amp; Smith, Dublin; T. &amp; J. Clark, Edinburgh.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1847</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='iii'/><anchor id='Pgiii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<head>Advertisement.</head>

<p>
In introducing to the notice of the British Public, Mr. Professor
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Greenleaf's</hi> Harmony of the Four Gospels, the publishers
have much satisfaction in announcing, that it has become
a Standard Work in the United States of America: and its
intrinsic value has induced them to make it known, in the
hope of promoting its circulation, in this country.
</p>

<p>
The spirit of infidelity is far more restless and active on the
other side of the Atlantic, than, happily, it has been in our
highly-favoured land: and, in consequence, it has called forth
some of the most able and powerful minds to correct and
subdue it. Among these advocates of Divine Revelation, the
profound lawyer, Professor Greenleaf, holds a most honourable
and distinguished place; and his work may justly be regarded
as combining sound and practical knowledge with well-directed
zeal and piety. Its character has been very fairly appreciated
in two leading North American journals, from which the following
extracts are made, as indicative of its contents, and also
of the high estimation in which its learned author is deservedly
held in his own country.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
EXTRACT OF A NOTICE OF PROFESSOR GREENLEAF ON THE FOUR GOSPELS,
OCTOBER 24, 1846, IN <q>THE NEW YORK OBSERVER.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Author is a lawyer, very learned in his profession, acute, critical and used
to raising and meeting practical doubts. Author of a treatise on the law of evidence,
which has already become a classic in the hands of the profession which he adorns,
and teaches in one of the Law Seminaries which do honour to our country in the
eyes of Europe, he brings rare qualifications for the task he assumes. That he
<pb n='iv'/><anchor id='Pgiv'/>
should, with the understanding and from the heart, accept the Gospel as the truth,
avow it as his Hope, and seek to discharge a duty to his fellow-men by laying before
them the grounds on which he founds this acceptance and this hope, are cheering
circumstances to the Christian, and present strong appeals to the indifferent.
</p>

<p>
To his profession, to the lawyers of the country, however, this work makes a
strong appeal. They are a very secular profession. Their business is almost
wholly conversant with material interests. Their time is absorbed in controversies,
of passion, or of interest. Acute, critical, and disputatious, they apparently present
a field unpropitious for the acceptance of a religion, spiritual, disinterested, and
insisting on perfect holiness. Still, they necessarily need to know and must enforce
the rules of finding truth and justice; the principles for ascertaining truth and dispensing
justice are the great subjects of all their discussions, so far as they are discussions
of any general principle. From this cause it is, that this profession has numbered
among its members, in every age, Christians of great eminence, and in our own day
and country, we cannot turn to the eminent men of this profession in any large
community, without the satisfaction of finding our Faith embraced by those whose
habits of practical as well as speculative investigation render them evidently the
best able to appreciate its claims and to detect any imperfections in its proof.
</p>

<p>
So we trust it always may be; and we are assured that the best models of
the mode of investigating matters of legal controversy as the proof of facts, are
writings on the evidences. Paley's treatise and that of Chalmers, on the oral
testimony in favour of Christ's mission, Paley's examination of the writings of the
apostle Paul, are, we are assured, the best models extant for forming the habit of
examining oral and documentary evidence. These are subjects on which it is of vital
importance, in a secular view, that a lawyer's habits should be right: in a spiritual
view the importance is unspeakable. Mr. Greenleaf has doubtless felt this truth,
and has also felt that his position would give to his labours some authority with his
brethren and with the public. He has given himself honourably to the labour,
and spread its results before the world.
</p>

<p>
It is long since Infidelity has found its advocates among the truly learned. Among
the guesses and speculations of a small portion of unsanctified medical men, she still
finds now and then a champion. Historians and philosophers have long since
discussed her pretensions. And now from the Jurists and Lawyers, the practical
masters of this kind of investigation, works are appearing, whereby not only an
earnest reception of the Gospel is manifested, but the mode and means of action and of
credit by which all human affairs are governed.
</p>

<p>
We lose in respect to our own investigations on this subject by its very sacredness.
We have an idle dread, that it is not open to free investigation: to severe practical
tests. We need to be invited, to be pressed to examine this subject freely. Dr.
Chalmers in one department of this inquiry has led the way. Mr. Greenleaf in
another has also presented an example. And it will not be competent, after these
men have thus investigated and taught the rules and laws of investigation, for any
man who is not willing to arrogate superior claims to learning and ability, to turn
aside superciliously from an examination of the Gospels.
</p>

<p>
Such are our views of this work, which we commend to all: to the legal
profession, from the character of its topics and the rank of its author: to men
desirous of knowledge, in every rank in life, because of its presenting this subject
under such a treatment as every-day practical questions are treated with.
<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>
It does not touch the intrinsic evidences of the Gospel: those which to the
believer are, after all, the highest proofs. But it is to be remembered, that these
are proofs which are not satisfactory until an examination of the outward evidences
has led men to the conviction, that the Gospels cannot be false.
</p>

<p>
FROM THE <q>NORTH AMERICAN REVIEW.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Professor Greenleaf on the Gospels, and Strauss' <q>Life of Jesus.</q></hi>&mdash;Of course we
place the titles of these two books together only by way of contrast. They relate,
it is true, to the same general subject; but it is hard to conceive of two works more
unlike in their scope, character, and purpose. The object of the one is to prove,
and of the other to disprove, the Christian religion. The one is the production of
an able and profound lawyer, a man who has grown grey in the halls of justice and
the schools of jurisprudence,&mdash;a writer of the highest authority on legal subjects,
whose life has been spent in weighing testimony and sifting evidence, and whose
published opinions on the rules of evidence are received as authoritative in all the
English and American tribunals,&mdash;for fourteen years the highly respected colleague
of the late Mr. Justice Story, and now the honoured head of the most distinguished
and prosperous school of English law in the world. The other is the work of a
German professor and speculatist, also profoundly learned in his way,&mdash;an ingenious
and erring framer of theories of the most striking character, almost unheard of till his
brain either conceived them or gave them currency, though relating to topics with
which men have been familiar for eighteen centuries,&mdash;a subtle controversialist,
whose work, as he himself avows, is deeply tinged with the most strongly marked
peculiarities of the philosophy and theology of his countrymen. We presume the
most ardent admirer of Dr. Strauss will not object to our characterising the two
works as excellent specimens, the one of clear and shrewd English common sense,
the other of German erudition, laborious diligence, and fertility in original
speculation. And if the subject of inquiry were one that involved his own temporal
and immediate interests, and it were necessary to determine which of these two
writers would give the wiser and safer counsel, or the more trustworthy opinion, we
suppose the same person would agree with us in making the choice.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
On the publishers announcing to Professor Greenleaf their
wish to introduce his Harmony to the notice of the British
Public, he with equal promptitude and kindness communicated
to them some important additions to his Introduction, and also
numerous valuable notes, more particularly adapted to the use
of Theological Students. These are now printed for the first
time: and at the suggestion of a very eminent and learned
clergyman of the Established Church, the publishers have added
in an Appendix an accurate and elegant translation of the late
learned French Advocate, A. M. J. J. Dupin's Refutation of
the eminent Jewish writer, Joseph Salvador's <q>Trial and
<pb n='vi'/><anchor id='Pgvi'/>
Condemnation of Jesus,</q> executed by the late distinguished
American Lawyer and Statesman, <hi rend='smallcaps'>John Pickering, LL.D.</hi>,
Counsellor at Law, and President of the American Academy of
Arts and Sciences (sometime Secretary to the American
Embassy in this country); who has most truly characterised
M. Dupin's examination of Salvador, as being <q>conducted
with an ability, learning, animation, and interest, that leave
nothing to be desired.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='vii'/><anchor id='Pgvii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<head>To The
Members Of The Legal Profession.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Gentlemen,</hi>
</p>

<p>
The subject of the following work I hope will not be
deemed so foreign to our professional pursuits, as to render it
improper for me to dedicate it, as I now respectfully do, to you.
If a close examination of the evidences of Christianity may be
expected of one class of men more than another, it would seem
incumbent on us, who make the law of evidence one of our
peculiar studies. Our profession leads us to explore the mazes
of falsehood, to detect its artifices, to pierce its thickest veils, to
follow and expose its sophistries, to compare the statements of
different witnesses with severity, to discover truth and separate
it from error. Our fellow-men are well aware of this; and
probably they act upon this knowledge more generally, and
with a more profound repose, than we are in the habit of
considering. The influence, too, of the legal profession upon
the community is unquestionably great; conversant, as it daily
is, with all classes and grades of men, in their domestic and
social relations, and in all the affairs of life, from the cradle to
the grave. This influence we are constantly exerting for good
or ill; and hence, to refuse to acquaint ourselves with the
evidences of the Christian religion, or to act as though, having
fully examined, we lightly esteemed them, is to assume an
appalling amount of responsibility.
</p>

<p>
The things related by the Evangelists are certainly of the
most momentous character, affecting the principles of our
conduct here, and our happiness for ever. The religion of
Jesus Christ aims at nothing less than the utter overthrow of
<pb n='viii'/><anchor id='Pgviii'/>
all other systems of religion in the world; denouncing them as
inadequate to the wants of man, false in their foundations, and
dangerous in their tendency. It not only solicits the grave
attention of all, to whom its doctrines are presented, but it
demands their cordial belief, as a matter of vital concernment.
These are no ordinary claims; and it seems hardly possible for
a rational being to regard them with even a subdued interest;
much less to treat them with mere indifference and contempt.
If not true, they are little else than the pretensions of a bold
imposture, which, not satisfied with having already enslaved
millions of the human race, seeks to continue its encroachments
upon human liberty, until all nations shall be subjugated under
its iron rule. But if they are well founded and just, they can
be no less than the high requirements of Heaven, addressed by
the voice of God to the reason and understanding of man,
concerning things deeply affecting his relations to his sovereign,
and essential to the formation of his character and of course to
his destiny, both for this life and for the life to come. Such
was the estimate taken of religion, even the religion of pagan
Rome, by one of the greatest lawyers of antiquity, when he
argued that it was either nothing at all, or was everything.
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Aut undique
religionem tolle, aut usquequaque conserva.</foreign><note place='foot'>Cicero,
Philip. II. § 43.</note>
</p>

<p>
With this view of the importance of the subject, and in the
hope that the present work may in some degree aid or at least
incite others to a more successful pursuit of this interesting
study, it is submitted to your kind regard, by
</p>

<lg>
<l>Your obedient servant,</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Simon Greenleaf</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Harvard University,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Dane Hall</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>May 1, 1846</hi>.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='ix'/><anchor id='Pgix'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Contents And Synopsis Of The Harmony.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The figures in the first column refer to the corresponding
Sections in</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome's Harmony</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Those in
the second column to the Sections in this Work.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{.8cm} p{.8cm} p{2cm} p{1cm} p{1cm} p{1cm} p{1cm}';
             tblcolumns: 'lw(3) lw(3) lw(17) lw(7) lw(7) lw(7) lw(7)'">
<row><cell>Sect.</cell><cell>Sect.</cell><cell>Contents.</cell><cell>Matt.</cell>
     <cell>Mark</cell><cell>Luke</cell><cell>John</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>Part I.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell>
     <cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>events connected with the
birth and childhood of our lord.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell>
     <cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Time</hi>:
<hi rend='italic'>About thirteen and a half years.</hi></cell><cell></cell>
     <cell></cell><cell></cell>
     <cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>1</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>Preface to Luke's Gospel.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>1, 1-4</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3</cell><cell>2</cell><cell>An Angel appears to Zacharias.
<hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>1, 5-25</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4</cell><cell>3</cell><cell>An Angel appears to Mary. <hi rend='italic'>Nazareth.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>1, 26-38</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5</cell><cell>4</cell><cell>Mary visits Elizabeth. <hi rend='italic'>Juttah.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>1, 39-56</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6</cell><cell>5</cell><cell>Birth of John the Baptist. <hi rend='italic'>Juttah.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>1, 57-80</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7, 8</cell><cell>6</cell><cell>An Angel appears to Joseph. <hi rend='italic'>Nazareth.</hi></cell><cell>1, 18-25</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8</cell><cell>7</cell><cell>The Birth of Jesus. <hi rend='italic'>Bethlehem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>2, 1-7</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10</cell><cell>8</cell><cell>An Angel appears to the Shepherds. <hi rend='italic'>Near Bethlehem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>2, 8-20</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11, 12</cell><cell>9</cell><cell>The circumcision of Jesus, and his presentation in the Temple. <hi rend='italic'>Bethlehem.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>2, 21-38</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13</cell><cell>10</cell><cell>The Magi. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Bethlehem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>2, 1-12</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13</cell><cell>11</cell><cell>The flight into Egypt. Herod's cruelty. The return. <hi rend='italic'>Bethlehem.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Nazareth.</hi></cell><cell>2, 13-23</cell><cell></cell><cell>2, 39-40</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14</cell><cell>12</cell><cell>At twelve years of age Jesus goes to the Passover. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>2, 41-52</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9</cell><cell>13</cell><cell>The Genealogies.</cell><cell>1, 1-17</cell><cell></cell><cell>3, 28-38</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>Part II.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>announcement and introduction of our lord's public ministry.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Time:</hi> <hi rend='italic'>About one year.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15</cell><cell>14</cell><cell>The Ministry of John the Baptist. The Desert. <hi rend='italic'>The Jordan.</hi></cell><cell>3, 1-12</cell><cell>1, 1-8</cell><cell>3, 1-18</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16</cell><cell>15</cell><cell>The Baptism of Jesus. <hi rend='italic'>The Jordan.</hi></cell><cell>3, 13-17</cell><cell>1, 9-11</cell><cell>3, 21-23</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17</cell><cell>16</cell><cell>The Temptation. <hi rend='italic'>Desert of Judea.</hi></cell><cell>4, 1-11</cell><cell>1, 12, 13</cell><cell>4, 1-13</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2</cell><cell>17</cell><cell>Preface to John's Gospel.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>1, 1-18</cell></row>
<pb n='x'/><anchor id='Pgx'/>
<row><cell>18</cell><cell>18</cell><cell>Testimony of John the Baptist to Jesus. <hi rend='italic'>Bethany beyond Jordan.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>1, 19-34</cell></row>
<row><cell>18</cell><cell>19</cell><cell>Jesus gains Disciples. <hi rend='italic'>The Jordan.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Galilee?</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>1, 35-52</cell></row>
<row><cell>19</cell><cell>20</cell><cell>The Marriage at Cana of Galilee.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>2, 1-12</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>Part III.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>our lord's first passover, and the subsequent transactions until the second.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Time:</hi> <hi rend='italic'>One year.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20</cell><cell>21</cell><cell>At the Passover Jesus drives the Traders out of the Temple. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>2, 13-25</cell></row>
<row><cell>21</cell><cell>22</cell><cell>Our Lord's discourse with Nicodemus. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>3, 1-21</cell></row>
<row><cell>22</cell><cell>23</cell><cell>Jesus remains in Judea and baptizes. Further testimony of John the Baptist.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>3, 22-36</cell></row>
<row><cell>23</cell><cell>24</cell><cell>Jesus departs into Galilee after John's imprisonment</cell><cell>4, 12. 14, 3-5</cell><cell>1, 14. 6, 17-20</cell><cell>4, 14. 3, 19, 20.</cell><cell>4, 1-3</cell></row>
<row><cell>23</cell><cell>25</cell><cell>Our Lord's discourse with the Samaritan woman. Many of the Samaritans believe on him. <hi rend='italic'>Shechem</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>Neapolis</hi>.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>4, 4-42</cell></row>
<row><cell>24</cell><cell>26</cell><cell>Jesus teaches publicly in Galilee.</cell><cell>4, 17</cell><cell>1, 14. 15</cell><cell>4, 14, 15</cell><cell>4, 43-45</cell></row>
<row><cell>24</cell><cell>27</cell><cell>Jesus again at Cana, where he heals the son of a nobleman lying ill at Capernaum. <hi rend='italic'>Cana of Galilee.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>4, 46-54</cell></row>
<row><cell>25</cell><cell>28</cell><cell>Jesus at Nazareth; he is there rejected, and fixes his abode at Capernaum.</cell><cell>4, 13-16</cell><cell></cell><cell>4, 16-31</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26</cell><cell>29</cell><cell>The call of Simon Peter and Andrew, and of James and John, with the miraculous draught of fishes. <hi rend='italic'>Near Capernaum.</hi></cell><cell>4, 18-22</cell><cell>1, 16-20</cell><cell>5, 1-11</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27</cell><cell>30</cell><cell>The healing of a Demoniac in the Synagogue. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell>1, 21-28</cell><cell>4, 31-37</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28</cell><cell>31</cell><cell>The healing of Peter's wife's mother, and many others. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum.</hi></cell><cell>8, 14-17</cell><cell>1, 29-34</cell><cell>4, 38-41</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28</cell><cell>32</cell><cell>Jesus with his Disciples goes from Capernaum throughout Galilee.</cell><cell>4, 23-25</cell><cell>1, 35-39</cell><cell>4, 42-44</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29</cell><cell>33</cell><cell>The healing of a Leper. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee.</hi></cell><cell>8, 2-4</cell><cell>1, 40-45</cell><cell>5, 12-16</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30</cell><cell>34</cell><cell>The healing of a Paralytic. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum.</hi></cell><cell>9, 2-8</cell><cell>2, 1-12</cell><cell>5, 17-26</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31</cell><cell>35</cell><cell>The call of Matthew. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum.</hi></cell><cell>9, 9</cell><cell>2, 13, 14</cell><cell>5, 27,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>Part IV.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>our lord's second passover, and the subsequent transactions until the third.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Time:</hi> <hi rend='italic'>One year.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32</cell><cell>36</cell><cell>The Pool of Bethesda; the healing of the infirm man; and our Lord's subsequent discourse. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>5, 1-47</cell></row>
<row><cell>33</cell><cell>37</cell><cell>The Disciples pluck ears of grain on the Sabbath. <hi rend='italic'>On the way to Galilee?</hi></cell><cell>12, 1-8</cell><cell>2, 23-28</cell><cell>6, 1-5</cell><cell></cell></row>
<pb n='xi'/><anchor id='Pgxi'/>
<row><cell>34</cell><cell>38</cell><cell>The healing of the withered hand on the Sabbath. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee.</hi></cell><cell>12, 9-14</cell><cell>3, 1-6</cell><cell>6, 6-11</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34</cell><cell>39</cell><cell>Jesus arrives at the Sea of Tiberias, and is followed by multitudes. <hi rend='italic'>Lake of Galilee.</hi></cell><cell>12, 15-21</cell><cell>3, 7-12</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35</cell><cell>40</cell><cell>Jesus withdraws to the Mountain, and chooses the Twelve; the multitudes follow him. <hi rend='italic'>Near Capernaum.</hi></cell><cell>10, 2-4,</cell><cell>3, 13-19</cell><cell>6, 12-19</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36</cell><cell>41</cell><cell>The Sermon on the Mount. <hi rend='italic'>Near Capernaum.</hi></cell><cell>5,1,-8,1</cell><cell></cell><cell>6, 20-49</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37</cell><cell>42</cell><cell>The healing of the Centurion's servant. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum.</hi></cell><cell>8, 5-13</cell><cell></cell><cell>7, 1-10</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38</cell><cell>43</cell><cell>The raising of the Widow's son. <hi rend='italic'>Nain.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>7, 11-17</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39</cell><cell>44</cell><cell>John the Baptist in prison sends Disciples to Jesus. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum?</hi></cell><cell>11, 2-19</cell><cell></cell><cell>7, 18-35</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40</cell><cell>45</cell><cell>Reflections of Jesus on appealing to his mighty Works. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum.</hi></cell><cell>11, 20-30</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41</cell><cell>46</cell><cell>While sitting at meat with a Pharisee, Jesus is anointed by a woman who had been a sinner. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum?</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>7, 36-50</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42</cell><cell>47</cell><cell>Jesus, with the Twelve, makes a second circuit in Galilee.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>8, 1-3</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42</cell><cell>48</cell><cell>The healing of a Demoniac. The Scribes and Pharisee blaspheme. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee.</hi></cell><cell>12, 22-37</cell><cell>3, 19-30</cell><cell>11, 14, 15, 17-23</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43, 44</cell><cell>49</cell><cell>The Scribes and Pharisees seek a sign. Our Lord's reflections. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee.</hi></cell><cell>12, 38-45</cell><cell></cell><cell>11, 16, 24-36</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45</cell><cell>50</cell><cell>The true Disciples of Christ his nearest relatives. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee.</hi></cell><cell>12, 46-50</cell><cell>3, 31-35</cell><cell>8, 19-21</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46</cell><cell>51</cell><cell>At a Pharisee's table, Jesus denounces woes against the Pharisees and others. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>11, 37-54</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>47</cell><cell>52</cell><cell>Jesus discourses to his Disciples and the multitude. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>12, 1-59</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>48</cell><cell>53</cell><cell>The slaughter of certain Galileans. Parable of the barren Fig-tree. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>13, 1-9</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>49</cell><cell>54</cell><cell>Parable of the Sower. <hi rend='italic'>Lake of Galilee.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Near Capernaum?</hi></cell><cell>13, 1-23</cell><cell>4, 1-25</cell><cell>8, 4-18</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>49</cell><cell>55</cell><cell>Parable of the Tares. Other Parables. <hi rend='italic'>Near Capernaum?</hi></cell><cell>13, 24-53</cell><cell>4, 26-34</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>50</cell><cell>56</cell><cell>Jesus directs to cross the Lake. Incidents. The tempest stilled. <hi rend='italic'>Lake of Galilee.</hi></cell><cell>8, 18-27</cell><cell>4, 35-41</cell><cell>8, 22-25, 9, 57-62</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>51</cell><cell>57</cell><cell>The two Demoniacs of Gadara. <hi rend='italic'>S. E. coast of the Lake of Galilee.</hi></cell><cell>8, 28-34, 9, 1</cell><cell>5, 1-21</cell><cell>8, 26-40</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>52</cell><cell>58</cell><cell>Levi's Feast. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum.</hi></cell><cell>9, 10-17</cell><cell>2, 15-22</cell><cell>5, 29-39</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>52</cell><cell>59</cell><cell>The raising of Jairus's daughter. The woman with a bloody flux. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum.</hi></cell><cell>9, 18-26</cell><cell>5, 22-43</cell><cell>8, 41-56</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>53, 54</cell><cell>60</cell><cell>Two blind men healed, and a dumb spirit cast out. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum?</hi></cell><cell>9, 27-34</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>55</cell><cell>61</cell><cell>Jesus again at Nazareth, and again rejected.</cell><cell>13, 54-58</cell><cell>6, 1-6</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>56, 57, 58, 59</cell><cell>62</cell><cell>A third circuit in Galilee. The Twelve instructed and sent forth. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee.</hi></cell><cell>9, 35-38, 10, 1, 5-42, 11, 1</cell><cell>6, 6-13</cell><cell>9, 1-6</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>60, 61</cell><cell>63</cell><cell>Herod holds Jesus to be John the Baptist, whom he had just before beheaded. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee?</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Perea.</hi></cell><cell>14, 1, 2, 6-12</cell><cell>6, 14-16, 21-29</cell><cell>9, 7-9</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>62, 63</cell><cell>64</cell><cell>The Twelve return, and Jesus retires with them across the Lake. Five thousand are fed. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>N. E. coast of the Lake of Galilee.</hi></cell><cell>14, 13-21</cell><cell>6, 30-44</cell><cell>9, 10-17</cell><cell>6, 1-14</cell></row>
<pb n='xii'/><anchor id='Pgxii'/>
<row><cell>64</cell><cell>65</cell><cell>Jesus walks upon the water. <hi rend='italic'>Lake of Galilee.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Gennesareth.</hi></cell><cell>14, 22-36</cell><cell>6, 45-56</cell><cell></cell><cell>6, 15-21</cell></row>
<row><cell>65, 83</cell><cell>66</cell><cell>Our Lord's discourse to the multitude in the Synagogue at Capernaum. Many Disciples turn back. Peter's profession of faith. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>6, 22-71, 7, 1</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>Part V.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>from our lord's third passover until his final departure from galilee at the festival of tabernacles.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Time:</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Six months.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>66</cell><cell>67</cell><cell>Our Lord justifies his disciples for eating with unwashen hands. Pharisaic Traditions. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum.</hi></cell><cell>15, 1-20</cell><cell>7, 1-23</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>67</cell><cell>68</cell><cell>The daughter of a Syrophenician woman is healed. <hi rend='italic'>Region of Tyre and Sidon.</hi></cell><cell>15, 21-28</cell><cell>7, 24-30</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>68, 69</cell><cell>69</cell><cell>A deaf and dumb man healed; also many others. Four thousand are fed. <hi rend='italic'>The Decapolis.</hi></cell><cell>15, 29-38</cell><cell>7, 31-37, 8, 1-9</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>69, 70</cell><cell>70</cell><cell>The Pharisees and Sadducees again require a sign. (See <ref target='Section_49'>§ 49</ref>.) <hi rend='italic'>Near Magdala.</hi></cell><cell>15, 39, 16, 1-4</cell><cell>8, 10-12</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>71</cell><cell>71</cell><cell>The Disciples cautioned against the leaven of the Pharisees, etc. <hi rend='italic'>N. E. coast of the Lake of Galilee.</hi></cell><cell>16, 4-12</cell><cell>8, 13-21</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>72</cell><cell>72</cell><cell>A blind man healed. <hi rend='italic'>Bethsaida.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Julias</hi>).</cell><cell></cell><cell>8, 22-26</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>73</cell><cell>73</cell><cell>Peter and the rest again profess their faith in Christ. (See <ref target='Section_66'>§ 66</ref>.) <hi rend='italic'>Region of Cesarea Philippi.</hi></cell><cell>16, 13-20</cell><cell>8, 27-30</cell><cell>9, 18-21</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>74</cell><cell>74</cell><cell>Our Lord foretells his own death and resurrection, and the trials of his followers. <hi rend='italic'>Region of Cesarea Philippi.</hi></cell><cell>16, 21-28</cell><cell>8, 31-38, 9, 1</cell><cell>9, 22-27</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>75</cell><cell>76</cell><cell>The Transfiguration. Our Lord's subsequent discourse with the three Disciples. <hi rend='italic'>Region of Cesarea Philippi.</hi></cell><cell>17, 1-13,</cell><cell>9, 2-13</cell><cell>9, 28-36</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>76</cell><cell>76</cell><cell>The healing of a Demoniac, whom the Disciples could not heal. <hi rend='italic'>Region of Cesarea Philippi.</hi></cell><cell>17, 14-21</cell><cell>9, 14-29</cell><cell>9, 37-43</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>77</cell><cell>77</cell><cell>Jesus again foretells his own death and resurrection (See <ref target='Section_74'>§ 74</ref>.) <hi rend='italic'>Galilee.</hi></cell><cell>17, 22, 2</cell><cell>9, 30-32</cell><cell>9, 43-45</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>78</cell><cell>78</cell><cell>The tribute-money miraculously provided. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum.</hi></cell><cell>17, 24-27</cell><cell>9, 33</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>79</cell><cell>79</cell><cell>The Disciples contend who should be greatest. Jesus exhorts to humility, forbearance, and brotherly love. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum.</hi></cell><cell>18, 1-35</cell><cell>9, 33-50</cell><cell>9, 46-50</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>80</cell><cell>80</cell><cell>The Seventy instructed and sent out. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>10, 1-16</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>81, 95</cell><cell>81</cell><cell>Jesus goes up the Festival of Tabernacles. His final departure from Galilee. Incidents in Samaria.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>9, 51-56</cell><cell>7, 2-10</cell></row>
<row><cell>95, 96</cell><cell>82</cell><cell>Ten Lepers cleansed. <hi rend='italic'>Samaria.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>17, 11-19</cell><cell></cell></row>
<pb n='xiii'/><anchor id='Pgxiii'/>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>Part VI.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>the festival of the tabernacles and the subsequent transactions until our lord's arrival at bethany, six days before the fourth passover.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Time:</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Six months less one week.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>81</cell><cell>83</cell><cell>Jesus at the Festival of Tabernacles. His public teaching. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>7, 11-53, 8, 1</cell></row>
<row><cell>82</cell><cell>84</cell><cell>The woman taken in Adultery. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>8, 2-11</cell></row>
<row><cell>83</cell><cell>85</cell><cell>Further public teaching of our Lord. He reproves the unbelieving Jews, and escapes from their hands. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>8, 12-59</cell></row>
<row><cell>86</cell><cell>86</cell><cell>A lawyer instructed. Love to our neighbour defined. Parable of the Good Samaritan. <hi rend='italic'>Near Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>10, 25-37</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>99</cell><cell>87</cell><cell>Jesus in the house of Martha and Mary. <hi rend='italic'>Bethany.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>10, 38-42</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>87</cell><cell>88</cell><cell>The Disciples again taught how to pray. <hi rend='italic'>Near Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>11, 1-13</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>85</cell><cell>89</cell><cell>The Seventy return. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem?</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>10, 17-24</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>84</cell><cell>90</cell><cell>A man born blind is healed on the Sabbath. Our Lord's subsequent discourses. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>9, 1-41, 10, 1-21</cell></row>
<row><cell>100, 101</cell><cell>91</cell><cell>Jesus in Jerusalem at the Festival of Dedication. He retires beyond Jordan. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Bethany beyond Jordan.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>10, 22-42</cell></row>
<row><cell>102</cell><cell>92</cell><cell>The raising of Lazarus. <hi rend='italic'>Bethany.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>11, 1-46</cell></row>
<row><cell>102</cell><cell>93</cell><cell>The counsel of Caiaphas against Jesus. He retires from Jerusalem. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Ephraim.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>11, 47-54</cell></row>
<row><cell>103, 88</cell><cell>94</cell><cell>Jesus beyond Jordan is followed by multitudes. The healing of the infirm woman on the Sabbath. <hi rend='italic'>Valley of Jordan.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Perea.</hi></cell><cell>19, 1. 2</cell><cell>10, 1</cell><cell>13, 10-21</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>89</cell><cell>95</cell><cell>Our Lord goes teaching and journeying towards Jerusalem. He is warned against Herod. <hi rend='italic'>Perea.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>13, 22-35</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>90</cell><cell>96</cell><cell>Our Lord dines with a chief Pharisee on the Sabbath. Incidents. <hi rend='italic'>Perea.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>14, 1-24</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>91</cell><cell>97</cell><cell>What is required of true Disciples. <hi rend='italic'>Perea.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>14, 25-35</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>92</cell><cell>98</cell><cell>Parables of the Lost Sheep, etc. Parable of the Prodigal Son. <hi rend='italic'>Perea.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>15, 1-32</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>93</cell><cell>99</cell><cell>Parable of the Unjust Steward. <hi rend='italic'>Perea.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>16, 1-13</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>93</cell><cell>100</cell><cell>The Pharisees reproved. Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus. <hi rend='italic'>Perea.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>16, 14-31</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>94</cell><cell>101</cell><cell>Jesus inculcates forbearance, faith, humility. <hi rend='italic'>Perea.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>17, 1-10</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>97</cell><cell>102</cell><cell>Christ's coming will be sudden. <hi rend='italic'>Perea.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>17, 20-37</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>98</cell><cell>103</cell><cell>Parables. The importunate Widow. The Pharisee and Publican. <hi rend='italic'>Perea.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>18, 1-14</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>103</cell><cell>104</cell><cell>Precepts respecting divorce. <hi rend='italic'>Perea.</hi></cell><cell>19, 3-12</cell><cell>10, 2-12</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>104</cell><cell>105</cell><cell>Jesus receives and blesses little Children. <hi rend='italic'>Perea.</hi></cell><cell>19, 13-15</cell><cell>10, 13-16</cell><cell>18, 15-17</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>105</cell><cell>106</cell><cell>The rich Young Man. Parable of the Labourers in the Vineyard. <hi rend='italic'>Perea.</hi></cell><cell>19, 16-30, 20, 1-16</cell><cell>10, 17-31</cell><cell>18, 18-30</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>106</cell><cell>107</cell><cell>Jesus a third time foretells his Death and Resurrection. (See <ref target='Section_74'>§ 74</ref>, <ref target='Section_77'>§ 77</ref>.) <hi rend='italic'>Perea.</hi></cell><cell>20, 17-19</cell><cell>10, 32-34</cell><cell>18, 31-34</cell><cell></cell></row>
<pb n='xiv'/><anchor id='Pgxiv'/>
<row><cell>107</cell><cell>108</cell><cell>James and John prefer their ambitious request. <hi rend='italic'>Perea.</hi></cell><cell>20, 20-28</cell><cell>10, 35-45</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>108</cell><cell>109</cell><cell>The healing of two blind men near Jericho.</cell><cell>20, 29-34</cell><cell>10, 46-52</cell><cell>18, 35-43, 19, 1</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>109</cell><cell>110</cell><cell>The visit to Zaccheus. Parable of the ten Minae. <hi rend='italic'>Jericho.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>19, 2-28</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>110</cell><cell>111</cell><cell>Jesus arrives at Bethany six days before the Passover.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>11, 55-57, 12, 1.9-11</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>Part VII.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>our lord's public entry into jerusalem, and the subsequent transactions before the fourth passover.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Time:</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Five days.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>111</cell><cell>112</cell><cell>Our Lord's public Entry into Jerusalem. <hi rend='italic'>Bethany.</hi></cell><cell>21, 1-11, 14-17</cell><cell>11, 1-11</cell><cell>19, 29-44</cell><cell>12, 12-19</cell></row>
<row><cell>112</cell><cell>113</cell><cell>The barren Fig-tree. The cleansing of the Temple. <hi rend='italic'>Bethany, Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>21, 12. 13, 18. 19</cell><cell>11, 12-19</cell><cell>19, 45-48, 21, 37.38</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>113</cell><cell>114</cell><cell>The barren Fig-tree withers away. <hi rend='italic'>Between Bethany and Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>21, 20-22</cell><cell>11, 20. 2</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>114</cell><cell>115</cell><cell>Christ's authority questioned. Parable of the Two Sons. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>21, 23-32</cell><cell>11, 27-33</cell><cell>20, 1-8</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>114</cell><cell>116</cell><cell>Parable of the wicked husbandmen. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>21, 33-46</cell><cell>12, 1-12</cell><cell>20, 9-19</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>114</cell><cell>117</cell><cell>Parable of the Marriage of the King's Son. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>22, 1-14</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>115</cell><cell>118</cell><cell>Insidious question of the Pharisees: Tribute to Cæsar. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>22, 15-22</cell><cell>12, 13-17</cell><cell>20, 20-26</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>115</cell><cell>119</cell><cell>Insidious question of the Sadducees: The Resurrection. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>22, 23-33</cell><cell>12, 18-27</cell><cell>20, 27-40</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>115</cell><cell>120</cell><cell>A lawyer questions Jesus. The two great Commandments. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>22, 34-40</cell><cell>12, 28-34</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>115</cell><cell>121</cell><cell>How is Christ the son of David? <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>22, 41-46</cell><cell>12, 35-37</cell><cell>20, 41-44</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>116</cell><cell>122</cell><cell>Warnings against the evil example of the Scribes and Pharisees. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>23, 1-12</cell><cell>12, 38.39</cell><cell>20, 45.46</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>116</cell><cell>123</cell><cell>Woes against the Scribes and Pharisees.  Lamentation over Jerusalem. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>23, 13-39</cell><cell>12, 40</cell><cell>20, 47</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>117</cell><cell>124</cell><cell>The Widow's mite. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell>12, 41-44</cell><cell>21, 1-4</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>111</cell><cell>125</cell><cell>Certain Greeks desire to see Jesus. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>12, 20-36</cell></row>
<row><cell>111</cell><cell>126</cell><cell>Reflections upon the unbelief of the Jews. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>12, 37-50</cell></row>
<row><cell>118</cell><cell>127</cell><cell>Jesus, on taking leave of the Temple, foretells its destruction and the persecution of his Disciples. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem. Mount of Olives.</hi></cell><cell>24, 1-14</cell><cell>13, 1-13</cell><cell>21, 5-19</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>118</cell><cell>128</cell><cell>The signs of Christ's coming to destroy Jerusalem, and put an end to the Jewish State and Dispensation. <hi rend='italic'>Mount of Olives.</hi></cell><cell>24, 15-42</cell><cell>13, 14-37</cell><cell>21, 20-36</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>118</cell><cell>129</cell><cell>Transition to Christ's final coming at the Day of Judgment. Exhortation to watchfulness. Parables: The ten Virgins. The five Talents. <hi rend='italic'>Mount of Olives.</hi></cell><cell>24, 43-51, 25, 1-30</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>119</cell><cell>130</cell><cell>Scenes of the Judgment Day. <hi rend='italic'>Mount of Olives.</hi></cell><cell>25, 31-46</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<pb n='xv'/><anchor id='Pgxv'/>
<row><cell>120</cell><cell>131</cell><cell>The Rulers conspire. The supper at Bethany. Treachery of Judas. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Bethany.</hi></cell><cell>26, 1-16</cell><cell>14, 1-11</cell><cell>22, 1-6</cell><cell>12, 2-8</cell></row>
<row><cell>121</cell><cell>132</cell><cell>Preparation for the Passover. <hi rend='italic'>Bethany.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>26, 17-19</cell><cell>14, 12-16</cell><cell>22, 7-13</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>Part VIII.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>the fourth passover; our lord's passion; and the accompanying events until the end of the jewish sabbath.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Time:</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Two days.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>122</cell><cell>133</cell><cell>The Passover Meal. Contention among the Twelve. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>26, 20</cell><cell>14, 17</cell><cell>22, 14-18, 24-30</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>123</cell><cell>134</cell><cell>Jesus washes the feet of his disciples. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem,</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>13, 1-20</cell></row>
<row><cell>124</cell><cell>136</cell><cell>Jesus point out the Traitor. Judas withdraws. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>26, 21-25</cell><cell>14, 18-21</cell><cell>22, 21-23</cell><cell>13, 21-35</cell></row>
<row><cell>125</cell><cell>136</cell><cell>Jesus foretells the fall of Peter, and the dispersion of the Twelve. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>26, 31-35</cell><cell>14, 27-31</cell><cell>22, 31-38</cell><cell>13, 36-38</cell></row>
<row><cell>126, 128</cell><cell>137</cell><cell>The Lord's Supper. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>26, 26-29</cell><cell>14, 22-25</cell><cell>22, 19.20</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>127, 129</cell><cell>138</cell><cell>Jesus comforts his Disciples. The Holy Spirit promised. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>14, 1-31</cell></row>
<row><cell>129</cell><cell>139</cell><cell>Christ the true Vine. His Disciples hated by the world. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>15, 1-27</cell></row>
<row><cell>129</cell><cell>140</cell><cell>Persecution foretold. Further promise of the Holy Spirit. Prayer in the name of Christ. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>16, 1-33</cell></row>
<row><cell>130</cell><cell>141</cell><cell>Christ's last prayer with his disciples. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>17, 1-26</cell></row>
<row><cell>131</cell><cell>142</cell><cell>The agony in Gethsemane. <hi rend='italic'>Mount of Olives.</hi></cell><cell>26, 30, 36-46</cell><cell>14, 26, 32-42</cell><cell>22, 39-46</cell><cell>18, 1</cell></row>
<row><cell>132</cell><cell>143</cell><cell>Jesus betrayed, and made prisoner. <hi rend='italic'>Mount of Olives.</hi></cell><cell>26, 47-56</cell><cell>14, 43-52</cell><cell>22, 47-53</cell><cell>18, 2-12</cell></row>
<row><cell>133, 134</cell><cell>144</cell><cell>Jesus before Caiaphas. Peter thrice denies him. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>26, 47-56</cell><cell>14, 53.54, 66-72</cell><cell>22, 54-62</cell><cell>18, 13-18, 25-27</cell></row>
<row><cell>134</cell><cell>145</cell><cell>Jesus before Caiaphas and the Sanhedrim. He declares himself to be the Christ; is condemned and mocked. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>26, 59-68</cell><cell>14, 55-65</cell><cell>22, 63-71</cell><cell>18, 19-24</cell></row>
<row><cell>135</cell><cell>146</cell><cell>The Sanhedrim lead Jesus away to Pilate. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>27, 1. 2, 11-14</cell><cell>15, 1-5</cell><cell>23, 1-5, 23, 6-12</cell><cell>18, 28-38</cell></row>
<row><cell>136</cell><cell>147</cell><cell>Jesus before Herod. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>23, 6-12</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>138</cell><cell>148</cell><cell>Pilate seeks to release Jesus. The Jews demand Barabbas. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>27, 15-26</cell><cell>15, 6-15</cell><cell>23, 13-25</cell><cell>18, 39. 40</cell></row>
<row><cell>138</cell><cell>149</cell><cell>Pilate delivers up Jesus to death. He is scourged and mocked. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>27, 26-30</cell><cell>15, 15-19</cell><cell></cell><cell>19, 1-3</cell></row>
<row><cell>138</cell><cell>150</cell><cell>Pilate again seeks to release Jesus. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>19, 4-16</cell></row>
<row><cell>139</cell><cell>151</cell><cell>Judas repents and hangs himself. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>27, 3-10</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>138, 140</cell><cell>152</cell><cell>Jesus is led away to be crucified. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>27, 31-34</cell><cell>15, 20-23</cell><cell>23, 26-33</cell><cell>19, 16.17</cell></row>
<row><cell>141</cell><cell>153</cell><cell>The Crucifixion. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>27, 35-38</cell><cell>15, 24-28</cell><cell>23, 33.34</cell><cell>19, 18-24</cell></row>
<row><cell>141</cell><cell>154</cell><cell>The Jews mock at Jesus on the Cross. He commends his mother to John. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>27, 39-44</cell><cell>15, 29-32, 15, 33-37</cell><cell>23, 35-37, 39-43</cell><cell>19, 25-27</cell></row>
<row><cell>141</cell><cell>155</cell><cell>Darkness prevails. Christ expires on the cross. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>27, 45-50</cell><cell></cell><cell>23, 44-46</cell><cell>19, 28-30</cell></row>
<pb n='xvi'/><anchor id='Pgxvi'/>
<row><cell>142, 144</cell><cell>156</cell><cell>The vail of the Temple rent, and graves opened. Judgment of the Centurion. The Women at the Cross. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>27, 51-56</cell><cell>15, 38-41</cell><cell>23, 45, 47-49</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>142</cell><cell>157</cell><cell>The taking down from the Cross. The burial. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>27, 57-61</cell><cell>15, 42-47</cell><cell>23, 50-56</cell><cell>19, 31-42</cell></row>
<row><cell>143</cell><cell>158</cell><cell>The Watch at the Sepulchre. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>27, 62-66</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>Part IX.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>our lord's resurrection, his subsequent appearances, and his ascension.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Time:</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Forty days.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>144</cell><cell>159</cell><cell>The Morning of the Resurrection. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>28, 2-4</cell><cell>16, 1</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>145</cell><cell>160</cell><cell>Visit of the Women to the Sepulchre. Mary Magdalene returns. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>28, 1</cell><cell>16, 2-4</cell><cell>24, 1-3</cell><cell>20, 1. 2</cell></row>
<row><cell>145</cell><cell>161</cell><cell>Vision of Angels in the Sepulchre. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>28, 5-7</cell><cell>16, 5-7</cell><cell>24, 4-8</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>145</cell><cell>162</cell><cell>The Women return to the City. Jesus meets them. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>28, 8-10</cell><cell>16, 8</cell><cell>24, 9-11</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>146</cell><cell>163</cell><cell>Peter and John run to the Sepulchre. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>24, 12</cell><cell>20, 3-10</cell></row>
<row><cell>147, 148</cell><cell>164</cell><cell>Our Lord is seen by Mary Magdalene at the Sepulchre. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell>16, 9-11</cell><cell></cell><cell>20, 11-18</cell></row>
<row><cell>149</cell><cell>165</cell><cell>Report of the Watch. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell>28, 11-15</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>150</cell><cell>166</cell><cell>Our Lord is seen of Peter. Then by two Disciples on the way to Emmaus. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Emmaus.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell>16, 12.13</cell><cell>24, 13-35</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>151</cell><cell>167</cell><cell>Jesus appears in the midst of the Apostles, Thomas being absent. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell>16, 14-18</cell><cell>24, 36-49</cell><cell>20, 19-23</cell></row>
<row><cell>152</cell><cell>168</cell><cell>Jesus appears in the midst of the Apostles, Thomas being present. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>20, 24-29</cell></row>
<row><cell>153</cell><cell>169</cell><cell>The Apostles go away into Galilee. Jesus shows himself to seven of them at the Sea of Tiberias. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee.</hi></cell><cell>28, 16</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>21, 1-24</cell></row>
<row><cell>154</cell><cell>170</cell><cell>Jesus meets the Apostles and above five hundred Brethren on a Mountain in Galilee. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee.</hi></cell><cell>28, 16-20</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>155</cell><cell>171</cell><cell>Our Lord is seen of James; then of all the Apostles. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell>16, 19.20</cell><cell>24, 50-53</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>156</cell><cell>172</cell><cell>The Ascension. <hi rend='italic'>Bethany.</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>20, 30.31</cell></row>
<row><cell>157</cell><cell>173</cell><cell>Conclusion of John's Gospel.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>21, 25</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='xvii'/><anchor id='Pgxvii'/>

<div>
<head>Table for Finding Any Passage in the Harmony.</head>

<div>
<head>Matthew.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1cm} p{1.5cm} p{1cm}';
             tblcolumns: 'lw(5) lw(10) lw(5)'">
<row><cell>Chap.</cell><cell>Verse.</cell><cell>Sect.</cell></row>
<row><cell>i.</cell><cell>1-17</cell><cell>13</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18-25</cell><cell>6</cell></row>
<row><cell>ii.</cell><cell>1-12</cell><cell>10</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13-23</cell><cell>11</cell></row>
<row><cell>iii.</cell><cell>1-12</cell><cell>14</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13-17</cell><cell>15</cell></row>
<row><cell>iv.</cell><cell>1-11</cell><cell>16</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>12</cell><cell>24</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13-16</cell><cell>28</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17</cell><cell>26</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18-22</cell><cell>29</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>23-25</cell><cell>32</cell></row>
<row><cell>v.</cell><cell>1-48</cell><cell>41</cell></row>
<row><cell>vi.</cell><cell>1-34</cell><cell>41</cell></row>
<row><cell>vii.</cell><cell>1-29</cell><cell>41</cell></row>
<row><cell>viii.</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>41</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2-4</cell><cell>33</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5-13</cell><cell>42</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14-17</cell><cell>31</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18-27</cell><cell>56</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>28-34</cell><cell>57</cell></row>
<row><cell>ix.</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>57</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2-8</cell><cell>34</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>9</cell><cell>35</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>10-17</cell><cell>58</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18-26</cell><cell>59</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>27-34</cell><cell>60</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35-38</cell><cell>62</cell></row>
<row><cell>x.</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>62</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2-4</cell><cell>40</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5-42</cell><cell>62</cell></row>
<row><cell>xi.</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>62</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2-19</cell><cell>44</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20-30</cell><cell>45</cell></row>
<row><cell>xii.</cell><cell>1-8</cell><cell>37</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>9-14</cell><cell>38</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15-21</cell><cell>39</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22-37</cell><cell>48</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>38-45</cell><cell>49</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>46-50</cell><cell>50</cell></row>
<row><cell>xiii.</cell><cell>1-23</cell><cell>54</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>24-53</cell><cell>55</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>54-58</cell><cell>61</cell></row>
<row><cell>xiv.</cell><cell>1, 2</cell><cell>63</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>3-5</cell><cell>24</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>6-12</cell><cell>63</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13-21</cell><cell>64</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22-36</cell><cell>65</cell></row>
<row><cell>xv.</cell><cell>1-20</cell><cell>67</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21-28</cell><cell>68</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>29-38</cell><cell>69</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>39</cell><cell>70</cell></row>
<row><cell>xvi.</cell><cell>1-4</cell><cell>70</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>4-12</cell><cell>71</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13-20</cell><cell>73</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21-28</cell><cell>74</cell></row>
<row><cell>xvii.</cell><cell>1-13</cell><cell>75</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14-21</cell><cell>76</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22, 23</cell><cell>77</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>24-27</cell><cell>78</cell></row>
<row><cell>xviii.</cell><cell>1-35</cell><cell>79</cell></row>
<row><cell>xix.</cell><cell>1, 2</cell><cell>94</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>3-12</cell><cell>104</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13-15</cell><cell>105</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>16-30</cell><cell>106</cell></row>
<row><cell>xx.</cell><cell>1-16</cell><cell>106</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17-19</cell><cell>107</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20-28</cell><cell>108</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>29-34</cell><cell>109</cell></row>
<row><cell>xxi.</cell><cell>1-11</cell><cell>112</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>12-13</cell><cell>113</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14-17</cell><cell>112</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18-19</cell><cell>113</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20-22</cell><cell>114</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>28-32</cell><cell>115</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>33-46</cell><cell>116</cell></row>
<row><cell>xxii.</cell><cell>1-14</cell><cell>117</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15-22</cell><cell>118</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>23-33</cell><cell>119</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>34-40</cell><cell>120</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>41-46</cell><cell>121</cell></row>
<row><cell>xxiii.</cell><cell>1-12</cell><cell>122</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13-39</cell><cell>123</cell></row>
<row><cell>xxiv.</cell><cell>1-14</cell><cell>127</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15-42</cell><cell>128</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>43-51</cell><cell>129</cell></row>
<row><cell>xxv.</cell><cell>1-30</cell><cell>129</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31-46</cell><cell>130</cell></row>
<row><cell>xxvi.</cell><cell>1-16</cell><cell>131</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17-19</cell><cell>132</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20</cell><cell>133</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21-25</cell><cell>135</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>26-29</cell><cell>137</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>30</cell><cell>142</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31-35</cell><cell>136</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>36-46</cell><cell>142</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>47-56</cell><cell>143</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>57, 58</cell><cell>144</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>59-68</cell><cell>145</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>69-75</cell><cell>144</cell></row>
<row><cell>xxvii</cell><cell>1, 2</cell><cell>146</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>3-10</cell><cell>151</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>11-14</cell><cell>146</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15-26</cell><cell>148</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>26-30</cell><cell>149</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31-34</cell><cell>152</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35-38</cell><cell>153</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>39-44</cell><cell>154</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>45-50</cell><cell>155</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>51-56</cell><cell>156</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>57-61</cell><cell>157</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>62-66</cell><cell>158</cell></row>
<row><cell>xxviii.</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>160</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2-4</cell><cell>159</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5-7</cell><cell>161</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>8-10</cell><cell>162</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>11-15</cell><cell>165</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>16</cell><cell>169</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>16-20</cell><cell>170</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='xviii'/><anchor id='Pgxviii'/>

<div>
<head>Mark.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1cm} p{1.5cm} p{1cm}';
             tblcolumns: 'lw(5) lw(10) lw(5)'">
<row><cell>Chap.</cell><cell>Verse.</cell><cell>Sect.</cell></row>
<row><cell>i.</cell><cell>1-8</cell><cell>14</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>9-11</cell><cell>15</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>12, 13</cell><cell>16</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14</cell><cell>24</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14, 15</cell><cell>26</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>16-20</cell><cell>29</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21-28</cell><cell>30</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>29-34</cell><cell>31</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35-39</cell><cell>32</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>40-45</cell><cell>33</cell></row>
<row><cell>ii.</cell><cell>1-12</cell><cell>34</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13, 14</cell><cell>35</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15-22</cell><cell>58</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>23-28</cell><cell>37</cell></row>
<row><cell>iii.</cell><cell>1-6</cell><cell>38</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>7-12</cell><cell>39</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13-19</cell><cell>40</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>19-30</cell><cell>48</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31-35</cell><cell>50</cell></row>
<row><cell>iv.</cell><cell>1-25</cell><cell>54</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>26-34</cell><cell>55</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35-41</cell><cell>56</cell></row>
<row><cell>v.</cell><cell>1-21</cell><cell>57</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22-43</cell><cell>59</cell></row>
<row><cell>vi.</cell><cell>1-6</cell><cell>61</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>6-13</cell><cell>62</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14-16</cell><cell>63</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17-20</cell><cell>24</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21-29</cell><cell>63</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>30-44</cell><cell>64</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>45-56</cell><cell>65</cell></row>
<row><cell>vii.</cell><cell>1-23</cell><cell>67</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>24-30</cell><cell>68</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31-37</cell><cell>69</cell></row>
<row><cell>viii</cell><cell>1-9</cell><cell>69</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>10-12</cell><cell>70</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13-21</cell><cell>71</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22-26</cell><cell>72</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>27-30</cell><cell>73</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31-38</cell><cell>74</cell></row>
<row><cell>ix.</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>74</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2-13</cell><cell>75</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14-29</cell><cell>76</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>30-32</cell><cell>77</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>33</cell><cell>78</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>33-50</cell><cell>79</cell></row>
<row><cell>x.</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>94</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2-12</cell><cell>104</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13-16</cell><cell>105</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17-31</cell><cell>106</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>32-34</cell><cell>107</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35-45</cell><cell>108</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>46-52</cell><cell>109</cell></row>
<row><cell>xi.</cell><cell>1-11</cell><cell>112</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>12-19</cell><cell>113</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20-26</cell><cell>114</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>27-33</cell><cell>115</cell></row>
<row><cell>xii.</cell><cell>1-12</cell><cell>116</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13-17</cell><cell>118</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18-27</cell><cell>119</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>28-34</cell><cell>120</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35-37</cell><cell>121</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>38, 39</cell><cell>122</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>40</cell><cell>123</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>41-44</cell><cell>124</cell></row>
<row><cell>xiii.</cell><cell>1-13</cell><cell>127</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14-37</cell><cell>128</cell></row>
<row><cell>xiv.</cell><cell>1-11</cell><cell>131</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>12-16</cell><cell>132</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17</cell><cell>133</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18-21</cell><cell>135</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22-25</cell><cell>137</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>26</cell><cell>142</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>27-31</cell><cell>136</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>32-42</cell><cell>142</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>43-52</cell><cell>143</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>53, 54</cell><cell>144</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>55-65</cell><cell>145</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>66-72</cell><cell>144</cell></row>
<row><cell>xv.</cell><cell>1-5</cell><cell>146</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>6-15</cell><cell>148</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15-19</cell><cell>149</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20-23</cell><cell>152</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>24-28</cell><cell>153</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>29-32</cell><cell>154</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>33-37</cell><cell>155</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>38-41</cell><cell>156</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>42-47</cell><cell>157</cell></row>
<row><cell>xvi.</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>159</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2-4</cell><cell>160</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5-7</cell><cell>161</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>8</cell><cell>162</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>9-11</cell><cell>164</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>12, 13</cell><cell>166</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14-18</cell><cell>167</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>19, 20</cell><cell>172</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>Luke.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1cm} p{1.5cm} p{1cm}';
             tblcolumns: 'lw(5) lw(10) lw(5)'">
<row><cell>Chap.</cell><cell>Verse.</cell><cell>Sect.</cell></row>
<row><cell>i.</cell><cell>1-4</cell><cell>1</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5-25</cell><cell>2</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>26-38</cell><cell>3</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>39-56</cell><cell>4</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>57-80</cell><cell>5</cell></row>
<row><cell>ii.</cell><cell>1-7</cell><cell>7</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>8-20</cell><cell>8</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21-38</cell><cell>9</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>39, 40</cell><cell>11</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>41-52</cell><cell>12</cell></row>
<row><cell>iii.</cell><cell>1-18</cell><cell>14</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>19-20</cell><cell>24</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21-23</cell><cell>15</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>23-38</cell><cell>13</cell></row>
<row><cell>iv.</cell><cell>1-13</cell><cell>16</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14</cell><cell>24</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14, 15</cell><cell>26</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>16-31</cell><cell>28</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31-37</cell><cell>30</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>38-41</cell><cell>31</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>42-44</cell><cell>32</cell></row>
<row><cell>v.</cell><cell>1-11</cell><cell>29</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>12-16</cell><cell>33</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17-26</cell><cell>34</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>27, 28</cell><cell>35</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>29-39</cell><cell>58</cell></row>
<row><cell>vi.</cell><cell>1-5</cell><cell>37</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>6-11</cell><cell>38</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>12-19</cell><cell>40</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20-26</cell><cell>41</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>27-30</cell><cell>41</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31</cell><cell>41</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>32-36</cell><cell>41</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>37-49</cell><cell>41</cell></row>
<row><cell>vii.</cell><cell>1-10</cell><cell>42</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>11-17</cell><cell>43</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18-35</cell><cell>44</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>36-50</cell><cell>46</cell></row>
<row><cell>viii.</cell><cell>1-3</cell><cell>47</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>4-18</cell><cell>54</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>19-21</cell><cell>50</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22-25</cell><cell>56</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>26-40</cell><cell>57</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>41-56</cell><cell>59</cell></row>
<row><cell>ix.</cell><cell>1-6</cell><cell>62</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>7-9</cell><cell>63</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>10-17</cell><cell>64</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18-21</cell><cell>73</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22-27</cell><cell>74</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>28-36</cell><cell>75</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>37-43</cell><cell>76</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>43-45</cell><cell>77</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>46-50</cell><cell>79</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>51-56</cell><cell>81</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>57-62</cell><cell>56</cell></row>
<row><cell>x.</cell><cell>1-16</cell><cell>80</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17-24</cell><cell>89</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>25-37</cell><cell>86</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>38-42</cell><cell>87</cell></row>
<row><cell>xi.</cell><cell>1-13</cell><cell>88</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14, 15</cell><cell>48</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>16</cell><cell>49</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17-23</cell><cell>48</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>24-28</cell><cell>49</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>29-36</cell><cell>49</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>37-54</cell><cell>51</cell></row>
<row><cell>xii.</cell><cell>1-59</cell><cell>52</cell></row>
<row><cell>xiii.</cell><cell>1-9</cell><cell>53</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>10-21</cell><cell>94</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22-35</cell><cell>95</cell></row>
<row><cell>xiv.</cell><cell>1-24</cell><cell>96</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>25-35</cell><cell>97</cell></row>
<row><cell>xv.</cell><cell>1-32</cell><cell>98</cell></row>
<row><cell>xvi.</cell><cell>1-13</cell><cell>99</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14-31</cell><cell>100</cell></row>
<pb n='xix'/><anchor id='Pgxix'/>
<row><cell>xvii.</cell><cell>1-10</cell><cell>101</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>11-19</cell><cell>82</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20-37</cell><cell>102</cell></row>
<row><cell>xviii.</cell><cell>1-14</cell><cell>103</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15-17</cell><cell>105</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18-30</cell><cell>106</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31-34</cell><cell>107</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35-43</cell><cell>109</cell></row>
<row><cell>xix.</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>109</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2-28</cell><cell>110</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>29-44</cell><cell>112</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>45-18</cell><cell>113</cell></row>
<row><cell>xx.</cell><cell>1-8</cell><cell>115</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>9-19</cell><cell>116</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20-26</cell><cell>118</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>27-40</cell><cell>119</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>41-44</cell><cell>121</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>45-46</cell><cell>122</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>47</cell><cell>123</cell></row>
<row><cell>xxi.</cell><cell>1-4</cell><cell>124</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5-19</cell><cell>127</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20-36</cell><cell>128</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>37, 38</cell><cell>118</cell></row>
<row><cell>xxii.</cell><cell>1-6</cell><cell>131</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>7-13</cell><cell>132</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14-18</cell><cell>133</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>19, 20</cell><cell>137</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21-23</cell><cell>135</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>24-30</cell><cell>133</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31-38</cell><cell>136</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>39-46</cell><cell>142</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>47-53</cell><cell>143</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>54-62</cell><cell>144</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>63-71</cell><cell>145</cell></row>
<row><cell>xxiii.</cell><cell>1-5</cell><cell>146</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>6-12</cell><cell>147</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13-25</cell><cell>148</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>26-33</cell><cell>152</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>33-34</cell><cell>153</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35-37</cell><cell>154</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>38</cell><cell>153</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>39-43</cell><cell>154</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>44-46</cell><cell>155</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>45</cell><cell>156</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>47-49</cell><cell>156</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>50-56</cell><cell>157</cell></row>
<row><cell>xxiv.</cell><cell>1-3</cell><cell>160</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>4-8</cell><cell>161</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>9-11</cell><cell>162</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>12</cell><cell>163</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13-35</cell><cell>166</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>36-49</cell><cell>167</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>50-53</cell><cell>172</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>John.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1cm} p{1.5cm} p{1cm}';
             tblcolumns: 'lw(5) lw(10) lw(5)'">
<row><cell>Chap.</cell><cell>Verse.</cell><cell>Sect.</cell></row>
<row><cell>i.</cell><cell>1-18</cell><cell>17</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>19-34</cell><cell>18</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35-52</cell><cell>19</cell></row>
<row><cell>ii.</cell><cell>1-12</cell><cell>20</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13-25</cell><cell>21</cell></row>
<row><cell>iii.</cell><cell>1-21</cell><cell>22</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22-36</cell><cell>23</cell></row>
<row><cell>iv.</cell><cell>1-3</cell><cell>24</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>4-42</cell><cell>25</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>43-45</cell><cell>26</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>46-54</cell><cell>27</cell></row>
<row><cell>v.</cell><cell>1-47</cell><cell>36</cell></row>
<row><cell>vi.</cell><cell>1-14</cell><cell>64</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15-21</cell><cell>65</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22-71</cell><cell>66</cell></row>
<row><cell>vii.</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>66</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2-10</cell><cell>81</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>11-53</cell><cell>83</cell></row>
<row><cell>viii.</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>83</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2-11</cell><cell>84</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>12-59</cell><cell>85</cell></row>
<row><cell>ix.</cell><cell>1-41</cell><cell>90</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>1-21</cell><cell>90</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22-42</cell><cell>91</cell></row>
<row><cell>xi.</cell><cell>1-46</cell><cell>92</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>47-54</cell><cell>93</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>55-57</cell><cell>111</cell></row>
<row><cell>xii.</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>111</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2-8</cell><cell>131</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>9-11</cell><cell>111</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>12-19</cell><cell>112</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20-36</cell><cell>125</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>37-50</cell><cell>126</cell></row>
<row><cell>xiii.</cell><cell>1-20</cell><cell>134</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21-35</cell><cell>135</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>36-38</cell><cell>136</cell></row>
<row><cell>xiv.</cell><cell>1-31</cell><cell>138</cell></row>
<row><cell>xv.</cell><cell>1-27</cell><cell>139</cell></row>
<row><cell>xvi.</cell><cell>1-33</cell><cell>140</cell></row>
<row><cell>xvii.</cell><cell>1-26</cell><cell>141</cell></row>
<row><cell>xviii.</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>142</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2-12</cell><cell>143</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13-18</cell><cell>144</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>19-24</cell><cell>145</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>25-27</cell><cell>144</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>28-38</cell><cell>146</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>39-40</cell><cell>148</cell></row>
<row><cell>xix.</cell><cell>1-3</cell><cell>149</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>4-16</cell><cell>150</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>16, 17</cell><cell>152</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18-24</cell><cell>153</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>25-27</cell><cell>154</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>28-30</cell><cell>155</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31-42</cell><cell>157</cell></row>
<row><cell>xx.</cell><cell>1, 2</cell><cell>160</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>3-10</cell><cell>163</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>11-18</cell><cell>164</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>19-23</cell><cell>167</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>24-29</cell><cell>168</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>30, 31</cell><cell>173</cell></row>
<row><cell>xxi.</cell><cell>1-24</cell><cell>169</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>25</cell><cell>173</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='xx'/><anchor id='Pgxx'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Advertisement To This Edition.</head>

<p>
The arrangement of the Gospels by Dr. Robinson was adopted in this
work, it being the latest published in the United States, and by a scholar
of the highest reputation. But by comparing his order with that of Archbishop
Newcome, as shown in contiguous columns in the Table of Contents
and Synopsis of the Harmony, it will be found that they differ only in a
very few unimportant particulars, not at all affecting the general scheme or
structure of the Harmony, or the purposes of this examination. I have,
however, in several places omitted their transposition of the verses of the
text, occurring within the limits of a section; it being more convenient to
insert them in the order in which they were written by the Evangelists.
</p>

<p>
The preliminary Dissertation has been revised and enlarged, and some
further notes added to the text, which is printed conformably to the
common octavo edition of the American Bible Society, except in a few
places, where the article a was accidentally printed instead of <hi rend='italic'>an</hi>, in the
words <hi rend='italic'>an house</hi>, &amp;c.
</p>

<lg>
<l>Cambridge, Massachusetts,</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>March</hi> 1, 1847.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>An Examination, Etc.</head>

<p>
§ 1. In examining the evidences of the Christian religion, it
is essential to the discovery of truth that we bring to the
investigation a mind freed, as far as possible, from existing
prejudice and open to conviction. There should be a readiness,
on our part, to investigate with candour, to follow the
truth wherever it may lead us, and to submit, without reserve
or objection, to all the teachings of this religion, if it be found
to be of divine origin. <q>There is no other entrance,</q> says
Lord Bacon, <q>to the kingdom of man, which is founded in
the sciences, than to the kingdom of heaven, into which no
one can enter but in the character of a little child.</q><note place='foot'>Nov.
Org. 1. 68. <q>Ut non alius fere sit aditus ad regnum hominus, quod
fundatur in scientiis, quam ad regnum cœlorum, in quod, nisi sub persona infantis,
intrare non datur.</q></note> The
docility which true philosophy requires of her disciples is not
a spirit of servility, or the surrender of the reason and judgment
to whatsoever the teacher may inculcate; but it is a
mind free from all pride of opinion, not hostile to the truth
sought for, willing to pursue the inquiry and impartially to
weigh the arguments and evidence, and to acquiesce in the
judgment of right reason. The investigation, moreover, should
be pursued with the serious earnestness which becomes the
greatness of the subject&mdash;a subject fraught with such momentous
consequences to man. It should be pursued as in the presence
of God, and under the solemn sanctions created by a lively
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
sense of his omniscience, and of our accountability to him for
the right use of the faculties which he has bestowed.
</p>

<p>
§ 2. In requiring this candour and simplicity of mind in those
who would investigate the truth of our religion, Christianity
demands nothing more than is readily conceded to every branch
of human science. All these have their data, and their axioms;
and Christianity, too, has her first principles, the admission of
which is essential to any real progress in knowledge. <q>Christianity,</q>
says Bishop Wilson, <q>inscribes on the portal of her
dominions, <q>Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God
as a little child, shall in nowise enter therein.</q> Christianity
does not profess to convince the perverse and headstrong, to
bring irresistible evidence to the daring and profane, to vanquish
the proud scorner, and afford evidences from which the careless
and perverse cannot possibly escape. This might go to destroy
man's responsibility. All that Christianity professes, is to
propose such evidences as may satisfy the meek, the tractable,
the candid, the serious inquirer.</q><note place='foot'>Bishop Wilson's Evidences, p. 38.</note>
</p>

<p>
§ 3. The present design, however, is not to enter upon any
general examination of the evidences of Christianity, but to
confine the inquiry to the testimony of the Four Evangelists,
bringing their narratives to the tests to which other evidence is
subjected in human tribunals. The foundation of our religion
is a basis of fact&mdash;the fact of the birth, ministry, miracles,
death, resurrection, and ascension of Jesus Christ. These are
related by the Evangelists as having actually occurred, within
their own personal knowledge. Our religion, then, rests on the
credit due to these witnesses. Are they worthy of implicit
belief, in the matters which they relate? This is the question,
in all human tribunals, in regard to persons testifying before
them; and we propose to test the veracity of these witnesses, by
the same rules and means which are there employed. The
importance of the facts testified, and their relations to the affairs
of the soul, and the life to come, can make no difference in the
principles or the mode of weighing the evidence. It is still the
evidence of matters of fact, capable of being seen and known
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
and related, as well by one man as by another. And if the
testimony of the Evangelist, supposing it to be relevant and
material to the issue in a question of property or of personal
right, between man and man, in a court of justice, ought to be
believed and have weight; then, upon the like principles, it
ought to receive our entire credit here. But if, on the other
hand, we should be justified in rejecting it, if there testified on
oath, then, supposing our rules of evidence to be sound, we may
be excused if we hesitate elsewhere to give it credence.
</p>

<p>
§ 4. The proof that God has revealed himself to man by
special and express communications, and that Christianity
constitutes that revelation, is no part of these inquiries. This
has already been shown, in the most satisfactory manner, by
others, who have written expressly upon this subject.<note place='foot'>See Dr. Hopkins's Lowell Lectures, particularly Lect. 2. Bp. Wilson's Evidences
of Christianity, Vol. i. pp. 45-61. Horne's Introduction, Vol. i. pp. 1-39.
Mr. Horne having cited all the best English writers on this subject, it is sufficient to
refer to his work alone.</note> Referring
therefore to their writings for the arguments and proofs, the
fact will here be assumed as true. That man is a religious
being, is universally conceded, for it has been seen to be
universally true. He is everywhere a worshipper. In every
age and country, and in every stage, from the highest intellectual
culture to the darkest stupidity, he bows with homage
to a superior Being. Be it the rude-carved idol of his own
fabrication, or the unseen divinity that stirs within him, it
is still the object of his adoration. This trait in the character
of man is so uniform, that it may safely be assumed, either
as one of the original attributes of his nature, or as necessarily
resulting from the action of one or more of those attributes.
</p>

<p>
§ 5. The object of man's worship, whatever it be, will naturally
be his standard of perfection. He clothes it with every
attribute, belonging, in his view, to a perfect character; and
this character he himself endeavours to attain. He may not,
directly and consciously, aim to acquire every virtue of his
deity, and to avoid the opposite vices; but still this will be the
inevitable consequence of sincere and constant worship. As
in human society men become assimilated, both in manners
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
and in moral principles, to their chosen associates, so in the
worship of whatever deity men adore, they <q>form to his the
relish of their souls.</q> To suppose, then, that God made man
capable of religion, and requiring it in order to the development
of the highest part of his nature, without communicating with
him, as a father, in those revelations which alone could perfect
that nature, would be a reproach upon God, and a contradiction.<note place='foot'>Hopkins's Lowell Lect., p. 48.</note>
</p>

<p>
§ 6. How it came to pass that man, originally taught, as
we doubt not he was, to know and to worship the true Jehovah,
is found, at so early a period of his history, a worshipper
of baser objects, it is foreign to our present purpose to inquire.
But the fact is lamentably true, that he soon became
an idolater, a worshipper of moral abominations. The
Scythians and Northmen adored the impersonations of heroic
valour and of bloodthirsty and cruel revenge. The mythology
of Greece and of Rome, though it exhibited a few examples
of virtue and goodness, abounded in others of gross licentiousness
and vice. The gods of Egypt were reptiles, and
beasts and birds. The religion of Central and Eastern Asia
was polluted with lust and cruelty, and smeared with blood,
rioting, in deadly triumph, over all the tender affections of
the human heart and all the convictions of the human understanding.
Western and Southern Africa and Polynesia are,
to this day, the abodes of frightful idolatry, cannibalism, and
cruelty; and the aborigines of both the Americas are examples
of the depths of superstition to which the human mind may
be debased. In every quarter of the world, however, there is
a striking uniformity seen, in all the features of paganism.
The ruling principle of her religion is terror, and her deity
is lewd and cruel. Whatever of purity the earlier forms of
paganism may have possessed, it is evident from history that it
was of brief duration. Every form, which history has preserved,
grew rapidly and steadily worse and more corrupt,
until the entire heathen world, before the coming of Christ, was
infected with that loathsome leprosy of pollution, described
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
with revolting vividness by St. Paul, in the beginning of his
Epistle to the Romans.
</p>

<p>
§ 7. So general and decided was this proclivity to the worship
of strange gods, that, at the time of the deluge, only one
family remained faithful to Jehovah; and this was a family
which had been favoured with his special revelation. Indeed
it is evident that nothing but a revelation from God could
raise men from the degradation of pagan idolatry, because
nothing else has ever had that effect. If man could achieve
his own freedom from this bondage, he would long since have
been free. But instead of this, the increase of light and civilization
and refinement in the pagan world has but multiplied
the objects of his worship, added voluptuous refinements to its
ritual, and thus increased the number and weight of his
chains. In this respect there is no difference in their moral
condition, between the barbarous Scythian and the learned
Egyptian or Roman of ancient times, nor between the ignorant
African and the polished Hindu of our own day. The only
method, which has been successfully employed to deliver man
from idolatry, is that of presenting to the eye of his soul an
object of worship perfectly holy and pure, directly opposite, in
moral character, to the gods he had formerly adored. He
could not transfer to his deities a better character than he himself
possessed. He must for ever remain enslaved to his idols,
unless a new and pure object of worship were revealed to him,
with a display of superior power sufficient to overcome his
former faith and his present fears, to detach his affections from
grosser objects, and to fix them upon that which alone is worthy.<note place='foot'>It has been well remarked, that, if we regard man as in a state of innocence,
we should naturally expect that God would hold communications with him; that if
we regard him as guilty, and as having lost the knowledge and moral image of God,
such a communication would be absolutely necessary, if man was to be restored.&mdash;Dr.
Hopkins's Lowell Lect., p. 62.</note>
This is precisely what God, as stated in the Holy Scriptures,
has done. He rescued one family from idolatry in the Old
World, by the revelation of himself to Noah; he called a
distinct branch of this family to the knowledge of himself, in
the person of Abraham and his sons; He extended this favour
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
to a whole nation, through the ministry of Moses; but it was
through that of Jesus Christ alone that it was communicated to
the whole world. In Egypt, by the destruction of all the
objects of the popular worship, God taught the Israelites that
he alone was the self-existent Almighty. At the Red Sea, he
emphatically showed them that He was the Protector and Saviour
of his people. At Sinai, he revealed himself as the righteous
Governor who required implicit obedience for men, and taught
them, by the strongly marked distinctions of the ceremonial
law, that he was a holy Being, of purer eyes than to behold
evil, and that could not look upon iniquity. The demerit of
sin was inculcated by the solemn infliction of death upon every
animal, offered as a propitiatory sacrifice. And when, by this
system of instruction, he had prepared a people to receive the
perfect revelation of the character of God, of the nature of his
worship, and of the way of restoration to his image and favour,
this also was expressly revealed by the mission of his Son.<note place='foot'>The argument here briefly sketched, is stated more at large, and with great
clearness and force, in an essay entitled <q>The Philosophy of the Plan of Salvation,</q>
pp. 13-107.</note>
</p>

<p>
§ 8. That the books of the Old Testament, as we now have them,
are genuine; that they existed in the time of our Saviour, and
were commonly received and referred to among the Jews, as
the sacred books of their religion;<note place='foot'>See Professor Stuart's Critical History and Defence of the Old Testament
Canon, where this is abundantly proved.</note> and that the text of the
Four Evangelists has been handed down to us in the state in
which it was originally written, that is, without having been
materially corrupted or falsified, either by heretics or Christians;
are facts which we are entitled to assume as true, until
the contrary is shown.
</p>

<p>
The genuineness of these writings really admits of as little
doubt, and is susceptible of as ready proof, as that of any
ancient writings whatever. The rule of municipal law on this
subject is familiar, and applies with equal force to all ancient
writing, whether documentary or otherwise; and as it comes
first in order, in the prosecution of these inquiries, it may, for
the sake of mere convenience, be designated as our first rule.
</p>

<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Every document, apparently ancient, coming from the proper
repository or custody, and bearing on its face no evident marks of
forgery, the law presumes to be genuine, and devolves on the
opposing party the burden of proving it to be otherwise.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
§ 9. An ancient document, offered in evidence in our courts,
is said to come from the proper repository, when it is found in
the place where, and under the care of persons with whom, such
writings might naturally and reasonably be expected to be
found; for it is this custody which gives authenticity to documents
found within it.<note place='foot'>Per Tindal, Ch. Just., in the case of the Bishop of Meath v. the Marquis of
Winchester, 3 Bing. N. C. 183, 200, 201. <q>It is when documents are found in
other than their proper places of deposit,</q> observed the Chief Justice, <q>that the
investigation commences, whether it was reasonable and natural, under the circumstances
of the particular case, to expect that they should have been in the place
where they are actually found; for it is obvious, that, which there can be only one
place of deposit strictly and absolutely proper, there may be many and various, that
are reasonable and probable, though differing in degree, some being more so, some
less; and in these cases the proposition to be determined is, whether the actual
custody is so reasonably and probably accounted for, that it impresses the mind
with the conviction that the instrument found in such custody must be genuine.</q>
See the cases cited in 1 Greenleaf on Evidence § 142. See also 1 Stark. on
Evidence, pp. 332-335, 381-386. Croughton v. Blake, 12 Mees. &amp; Welsb. 205,
208. Doe v. Phillips, 10 Jurist, p. 34. It is this defect, namely, that they do not
come from the proper or natural repository, which shows the fabulous character
of many pretended revelations, from the Gospel of the Infancy to the Book of
Mormon.</note> If they come from such a place, and
bear no evident marks of forgery, the law presumes that they
are genuine, and they are permitted to be read in evidence,
unless the opposing party is able successfully to impeach them.<note place='foot'>1 Greenleaf on Evid. § 34, 142, 570.</note>
The burden of showing them to be false and unworthy of credit,
is devolved on the party who makes that objection. The presumption
of law is the judgment of charity. It presumes that
every man is innocent until he is proven guilty; that everything
has been done fairly and legally, until it is proved to have
been otherwise; and that every document, found in its proper
repository, and not bearing marks of forgery, is genuine. Now
this is precisely the case with the Sacred Writings. They have
been used in the church from time immemorial, and thus are
found in the place where alone they ought to be looked for.
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
They come to us, and challenge our reception of them as genuine
writings, precisely as Domesday Book, the Ancient Statutes
of Wales, or any other of the ancient documents which have
recently been published under the British Record Commission,
are received. They are found in familiar use in all the churches
of Christendom, as the sacred books to which all denominations
of Christians refer, as the standard of their faith. There is no
pretence that they were engraven on plates of gold and discovered
in a cave, nor that they were brought from heaven
by angels; but they are received as the plain narratives
and writings of the men whose names they respectively
bear, made public at the time they were written; and though
there are some slight discrepancies among the copies subsequently
made, there is no pretence that the originals were
anywhere corrupted. If it be objected that the originals are
lost, and that copies alone are now produced, the principles of
the municipal law here also afford a satisfactory answer. For
the multiplication of copies was a public fact, in the faithfulness
of which all the Christian community had an interest, and it is
a rule of law, that, <hi rend='italic'>in matters of public and general interest, all
persons must be presumed to be conversant, on the principle that
individuals are presumed to be conversant with their own affairs</hi>.
Therefore it is that, in such matters, the prevailing current of
assertion is resorted to as evidence, for it is to this that every
member of the community is supposed to be privy.<note place='foot'>Morewood v. Wood, 14 East, 329, n. Per Lord Kenyon. Weeks v. Sparke,
1 M. &amp; S. 686; the Berkeley Peerage Case, 4 Campb. 416. Per Mansfield, Ch. J.
See 1 Greenleaf on Evidence, § 128.</note> The persons,
moreover, who multiplied these copies, may be regarded,
in some manner, as the agents of the Christian public, for
whose use and benefit the copies were made; and on the
ground of the credit due to such agents, and of the public
nature of the facts themselves, the copies thus made are entitled
to an extraordinary degree of confidence, and, as in the case of
official registers and other public books, it is not necessary that
they should be confirmed and sanctioned by the ordinary tests
of truth.<note place='foot'>1 Starkie on Evidence, pp. 195, 230; 1 Greenleaf on Evidence, § 483.</note> If any ancient document concerning our public
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
rights were lost, copies which had been as universally received
and acted upon as the Four Gospels have been, would have been
received in evidence in any of our courts of justice, without the
slightest hesitation. The entire text of the Corpus Juris Civilis
is received as authority in all the courts of continental Europe,
upon much weaker evidence of its genuineness; for the integrity
of the Sacred Text has been preserved by the jealousy of opposing
sects, beyond any moral possibility of corruption; while
that of the Roman Civil Law has been preserved only by tacit
consent, without the interest of any opposing school, to watch
over and preserve it from alteration.
</p>

<p>
§ 10. These copies of the Holy Scriptures having thus been
in familiar use in the churches, from the time when the text
was committed to writing; having been watched with vigilance
by so many sects, opposed to each other in doctrine, yet all
appealing to these Scriptures for the correctness of their faith;
and having in all ages, down to this day, been respected as the
authoritative source of all ecclesiastical power and government,
and submitted to, and acted under in regard to so many claims
of right, on the one hand, and so many obligations of duty, on
the other; it is quite erroneous to suppose that the Christian is
bound to offer any further proof of their genuineness or authenticity.
It is for the objector to show them spurious; for on
him, by the plainest rules of law, lies the burden of proof.<note place='foot'>The arguments for the genuineness and authenticity of the books of the Holy
Scriptures are briefly, yet very fully stated, and almost all the writers of authority
are referred to by Mr. Horne, in his Introduction to the Study of the Holy Scriptures,
vol. i., passim. The same subject is discussed in a more popular manner in
the Lectures of Bp. Wilson, and of Bp. Sumner of Chester, on the Evidences of
Christianity; and, in America, the same question, as it relates to the Gospels, has
been argued by Bp. M'Ilvaine, in his Lectures.</note> If
it were the case of a claim to a franchise, and a copy of an ancient
deed or charter were produced in support of the title, under
parallel circumstances on which to presume its genuineness, no
lawyer, it is believed, would venture to deny either its admissibility
in evidence, or the satisfactory character of the proof. In
a recent case in the House of Lords, precisely such a document,
being an old manuscript copy, purporting to have been extracted
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
from ancient Journals of the House, which were lost, and to
have been made by an officer whose duty it was to prepare lists
of the Peers, was held admissible in a claim of peerage.<note place='foot'>See the case of the Slane Peerage, 5 Clark &amp; Finelly's Rep., p. 24. See also
the case of the Fitzwalter Peerage, 10 Clark &amp; Finelly's Rep., p. 948.</note>
</p>

<p>
§ 11. Supposing, therefore, that it is not irrational, nor inconsistent
with sound philosophy, to believe that God has made
a special and express revelation of his character and will to man,
and that the sacred books of our religion are genuine, as we
now have them; we proceed to examine and compare the testimony
of the Four Evangelists, as witnesses to the life and
doctrines of Jesus Christ; in order to determine the degree of
credit, to which, by the rules of evidence applied in human
tribunals, they are justly entitled. Our attention will naturally
be first directed to the witnesses themselves, to see who and
what manner of men they were, and we shall take them in the
order of their writings; stating the prominent traits only in
their lives and characters, as they are handed down to us by
credible historians.
</p>

<p>
§ 12. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Matthew</hi>, called also <hi rend='smallcaps'>Levi</hi>, was a Jew of Galilee, but
of what city is uncertain. He held the place of publican, or
tax-gatherer, under the Roman government, and his office seems
to have consisted in collecting the taxes within his district, as
well as the duties and customs levied on goods and persons,
passing in and out of his district or province, across the lake of
Genesareth. While engaged in this business, at the office or
usual place of collection, he was required by Jesus to follow
him, as one of his disciples; a command which he immediately
obeyed. Soon afterwards, he appears to have given a great
entertainment to his fellow-publicans and friends, at which
Jesus was present; intending probably both to celebrate his
own change of profession, and to give them an opportunity
to profit by the teaching of his new Master.<note place='foot'>Matt. ix. 10; Mark ii. 14, 15; Luke v. 29.</note> He was constituted
one of the twelve apostles, and constantly attended the
person of Jesus as a faithful follower, until the crucifixion; and
after the ascension of his Master he preached the gospel for
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
some time, with the other apostles, in Judea, and afterwards in
Ethiopia, where he died.
</p>

<p>
He is generally allowed to have written first, of all the evangelists;
but whether in the Hebrew or the Greek language, or
in both, the learned are not agreed, nor is it material to our
purpose to inquire; the genuineness of our present Greek
gospel being sustained by satisfactory evidence.<note place='foot'>The authorities on this subject are collected in Horne's Introduction, vol. iv.
pp. 234-238, part 2, chap. ii. sec. 2.</note> The precise
time when he wrote is also uncertain, the several dates given
to it among learned men, varying from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 37 to <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 64.
The earlier date, however, is argued with greater force, from
the improbability that the Christians would be left for several
years without a general and authentic history of our Saviour's
ministry; from the evident allusions which it contains to a
state of persecution in the church at the time it was written;
from the titles of sanctity ascribed to Jerusalem, and a higher
veneration testified for the temple than is found in the other
and later evangelists; from the comparative gentleness with
which Herod's character and conduct are dealt with, that bad
prince probably being still in power; and from the frequent
mention of Pilate, as still governor of Judea.<note place='foot'>See Horne's Introduction, vol. iv. p. 229-232.</note>
</p>

<p>
§ 13. That Matthew was himself a native Jew, familiar with
the opinions, ceremonies, and customs of his countrymen; that
he was conversant with the Sacred Writings, and habituated to
their idiom; a man of plain sense, but of little learning, except
what he derived from the Scriptures of the Old Testament;
that he wrote seriously and from conviction, and had, on most
occasions, been present, and attended closely, to the transactions
which he relates, and relates, too, without any view of
applause to himself; are facts which we may consider established
by internal evidence, as strong as the nature of the case
will admit. It is deemed equally well proved, both by internal
evidence and the aid of history, that he wrote for the use of his
countrymen the Jews. Every circumstance is noticed which
might conciliate their belief, and every unnecessary expression
is avoided which might obstruct it. They looked for the Messiah,
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
of the lineage of David, and born in Bethlehem, in the circumstances
of whose life the prophecies should find fulfilment, a
matter, in their estimation, of peculiar value; and to all these
this evangelist has directed their especial attention.<note place='foot'>See Campbell on the Four Gospels, vol. iii. pp. 35, 36; Preface to St. Matthew's
Gospel, § 22, 23.</note>
</p>

<p>
§ 14. Allusion has been already made to his employment as
a collector of taxes and customs; but the subject is too important
to be passed over without further notice. The tribute imposed
by the Romans upon countries conquered by their arms
was enormous. In the time of Pompey, the sums annually
exacted from their Asiatic provinces, of which Judea was one,
amounted to about four millions and a half sterling, or about
twenty-two millions of dollars. These exactions were made in
the usual forms of direct and indirect taxation; the rate of the
customs on merchandise varying from an eighth to a fortieth
part of the value of the commodity; and the tariff including all
the principal articles of the commerce of the East, much of
which, as is well known, still found its way to Italy through
Palestine, as well as by the way of Damascus and of Egypt.
The direct taxes consisted of a capitation-tax and a land-tax,
assessed upon a valuation or census, periodically taken, under
the oath of the individual, with heavy penal sanctions.<note place='foot'>See Gibbon's Rome, vol. i. ch. vi. and vol. iii. ch. xvii. and authorities there
cited. Cod. Theod. Lib. xi. tit. 1-28, with the notes of Gothofred. Gibbon treats
particularly of the revenues of a later period than our Saviour's time; but the
general course of proceeding, in the levy and collection of taxes, is not known to
have been changed since the beginning of the empire.</note> It is
natural to suppose that these taxes were not voluntarily paid,
especially since they were imposed by the conqueror upon a
conquered people, and by a heathen, too, upon the people of the
house of Israel. The increase of taxes has generally been found
to multiply discontents, evasions and frauds on the one hand,
and, on the other, to increase vigilance, suspicion, close scrutiny,
and severity of exaction. The penal code, as revised by Theodosius,
will give us some notion of the difficulties in the way of
the revenue officers, in the earlier times of which we are speaking.
These difficulties must have been increased by the fact
that, at this period, a considerable portion of the commerce of
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
that part of the world was carried on by the Greeks, whose ingenuity
and want of faith were proverbial. It was to such an
employment and under such circumstances, that Matthew was
educated; an employment which must have made him acquainted
with the Greek language, and extensively conversant with the
public affairs and the men of business of his time; thus entitling
him to our confidence, as an experienced and intelligent observer
of events passing before him. And if the men of that day were,
as in truth they appear to have been, as much disposed as those
of the present time, to evade the payment of public taxes and
duties, and to elude, by all possible means, the vigilance of the
revenue officers, Matthew must have been familiar with a great
variety of the forms of fraud, imposture, cunning, and deception,
and must have become habitually distrustful, scrutinizing, and
cautious; and, of course, much less likely to have been deceived
in regard to many of the facts in our Lord's ministry, extraordinary
as they were, which fell under his observation. This
circumstance shows both the sincerity and the wisdom of Jesus,
in selecting him for an eye-witness of his conduct, and adds
great weight to the value of the testimony of this evangelist.
</p>

<p>
§ 15. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Mark</hi> was the son of a pious sister of Barnabas, named
Mary, who dwelt at Jerusalem, and at whose home the early
Christians often assembled. His Hebrew name was John; the
surname of Mark having been adopted, as is supposed, when he
left Judea to preach the gospel in foreign countries; a practice
not unusual among the Jews of that age, who frequently, upon
such occasions, assumed a name more familiar than their own
to the people whom they visited. He is supposed to have been
converted to the Christian faith by the ministry of Peter. He
travelled from Jerusalem to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas,
and afterwards accompanied them elsewhere. When they landed
at Perga in Pamphylia, he left them and returned to Jerusalem;
for which reason, when he afterwards would have gone with
them, Paul refused to take him. Upon this, a difference of
opinion arose between the two apostles, and they separated,
Barnabas taking Mark with him to Cyprus. Subsequently he
accompanied Timothy to Rome, at the express desire of Paul.
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
From this city he probably went into Asia, where he found
Peter, with whom he returned to Rome, in which city he is
supposed to have written and published his Gospel. Such is
the outline of his history, as it is furnished by the New Testament.<note place='foot'>Acts xii. 12, 25; xiii. 5, 13; and xv. 36-41; 2 Tim. iv. 11; Phil. 24; Col. iv.
10; 1 Pet. v. 13.</note>
The early historians add, that after this he went into
Egypt and planted a church in Alexandria, where he died.<note place='foot'>Horne's Introduction, vol. iv. pp. 252, 253.</note>
</p>

<p>
§ 16. It is agreed that Mark wrote his Gospel for the use of
Gentile converts; an opinion deriving great force from the explanations
introduced into it, which would have been useless to
a Jew;<note place='foot'>Mark vii. 2, 11; and ix. 43, and elsewhere.</note> and that it was composed for those at Rome, is believed,
not only from the numerous Latinisms it contains, but from the
unanimous testimony of ancient writers, and from the internal
evidence afforded by the Gospel itself.
</p>

<p>
§ 17. Some have entertained the opinion that Mark compiled
his account from that of Matthew, of which they supposed
it an abridgment. But this notion has been refuted by Koppe,
and others,<note place='foot'>Mr. Norton has conclusively disposed of this objection, in his Evidences of the
Genuineness of the Gospels, vol. i. Additional Notes, see. 2, pp. cxv-cxxxii.</note> and is now generally regarded as untenable. For
Mark frequently deviates from Matthew in the order of time, in
his arrangement of facts; and he adds many things not related
by the other evangelists; neither of which a mere epitomizer
would probably have done. He also omits several things related
by Matthew, and imperfectly describes others, especially the
transactions of Christ with the apostles after the resurrection;
giving no account whatever of his appearance in Galilee; omissions
irreconcilable with any previous knowledge of the Gospel
according to Matthew. To these proofs we may add, that in
several places there are discrepancies between the accounts of
Matthew and Mark, not, indeed, irreconcilable, but sufficient
to destroy the probability that the latter copied from the
former.<note place='foot'>Compare Mark x. 46, and xiv. 69, and iv. 35, and i. 35, and ix. 28, with
Matthew's narrative of the same events.</note> The striking coincidences between them, in style,
words, and things, in other places, may be accounted for by
considering that Peter, who is supposed to have dictated this
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
Gospel to Mark, was quite as intimately acquainted as Matthew
with the miracles and discourses of our Lord; which, therefore,
he would naturally recite in his preaching; and that the same
things might very naturally be related in the same manner, by
men who sought not after excellency of speech. Peter's agency
in the narrative of Mark is asserted by all ancient writers, and
is confirmed by the fact, that his humility is conspicuous in
every part of it, where anything is or might be related of him;
his weaknesses and fall being fully exposed, while things which
might redound to his honour, are either omitted or but slightly
mentioned; that scarcely any transaction of Jesus is related,
at which Peter was not present, and that all are related with
that circumstantial minuteness which belongs to the testimony
of an eye-witness.<note place='foot'>See Horne's Introd. vol. iv. pp 252-259.</note> We may, therefore, regard the Gospel of
Mark as an original composition, written at the dictation of
Peter, and consequently as another original narrative of the life,
miracles, and doctrines of our Lord.
</p>

<p>
§ 18. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Luke</hi>, according to Eusebius, was a native of Antioch,
by profession a physician, and for a considerable period a companion
of the apostle Paul. From the casual notices of him in
the Scriptures, and from the early Christian writers, it has been
collected, that his parents were Gentiles, but that he in his
youth embraced Judaism, from which he was converted to
Christianity. The first mention of him is that he was with Paul
at Troas;<note place='foot'>Acts xvi. 10, 11.</note> whence he appears to have attended him to Jerusalem;
continued with him in all his troubles in Judea; and
sailed with him when he was sent a prisoner from Cæsarea to
Rome, where he remained with him during his two years'
confinement. As none of the ancient fathers have mentioned
his having suffered martyrdom, it is generally supposed that
he died a natural death.
</p>

<p>
§ 19. That he wrote his Gospel for the benefit of Gentile
converts is affirmed by the unanimous voice of Christian antiquity;
and it may also be inferred from its dedication to
a Gentile. He is particularly careful to specify various circumstances
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
conducive to the information of strangers, but not so to
the Jews; he gives the lineage of Jesus upwards, after the
manner of the Gentiles, instead of downwards, as Matthew had
done; tracing it up to Adam, and thus showing that Jesus was
the promised seed of the woman; and he marks the eras of his
birth, and of the ministry of John, by the reigns of the Roman
emperors. He also has introduced several things, not mentioned
by the other evangelists, but highly encouraging to the Gentiles
to turn to God in the hope of pardon and acceptance; of which
description are the parables of the publican and pharisee, in the
temple; the lost piece of silver; and the prodigal son; and the
fact of Christ's visit to Zaccheus the publican, and the pardon
of the penitent thief.
</p>

<p>
§ 20. That Luke was a physician, appears not only from the
testimony of Paul,<note place='foot'>Col. iv. 14. Luke, the beloved physician.</note> but from the internal marks in his Gospel,
showing that he was both an acute observer, and had given
particular and even professional attention to all our Saviour's
miracles of healing. Thus, the man whom Matthew and Mark
describe simply as a leper, Luke describes as <emph>full</emph> of leprosy;<note place='foot'>Luke v. 12; Matt. viii. 2; Mark i. 40.</note>
he, whom they mention as having a withered hand, Luke says
had his <emph>right</emph> hand withered;<note place='foot'>Luke vi. 6; Matt. xii. 10; Mark iii. 1.</note> and of the maid, of whom the
others say that Jesus took her by the hand and she arose, he
adds, that <emph>her spirit came to her again</emph>.<note place='foot'>Luke viii. 55; Matt. ix. 25; Mark v. 42.</note> He alone, with professional
accuracy of observation, says that <hi rend='italic'>virtue went out</hi> of
Jesus, and healed the sick;<note place='foot'>Luke vi. 19.</note> he alone states the fact that
the sleep of the disciples in Gethsemane was <hi rend='italic'>induced by extreme
sorrow</hi>; and mentions the blood-like sweat of Jesus, as
occasioned by the <emph>intensity of his agony</emph>; and he alone relates
the miraculous healing of Malchus's ear.<note place='foot'>Luke xxii. 44, 45, 51.</note> That he was also a
man of a liberal education, the comparative elegance of his
writings sufficiently show.<note place='foot'>See Horne's Introd. vol. iv. pp. 260-272, where references may be found to
earlier writers.</note>
</p>

<p>
§ 21. The design of Luke's Gospel was to supersede the
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
defective and inaccurate narratives then in circulation, and to
deliver to Theophilus, to whom it is addressed, a full and
authentic account of the life, doctrines, miracles, death and
resurrection of our Saviour. Who Theophilus was, the learned
are not perfectly agreed; but the most probable opinion is that
of Dr. Lardner, now generally adopted, that, as Luke wrote
his Gospel in Greece, Theophilus was a man of rank in that
country.<note place='foot'>See Lardner's Works, 8vo. vol. vi. pp. 138, 139; 4to. vol. iii. pp. 203, 204;
and other authors, cited in Horne's Introd. vol. iv. p. 267.</note> Either the relations subsisting between him and
Luke, or the dignity and power of his rank, or both, induced
the evangelist, who himself also <q>had perfect understanding
of all things from the first,</q> to devote the utmost care to the
drawing up of a complete and authentic narrative of these great
events. He does not affirm himself to have been an eye-witness;
though his personal knowledge of some of the transactions may
well be inferred from the <q>perfect understanding</q> which he
says he possessed. Some of the learned seem to have drawn
this inference as to them all, and to have placed him in the
class of original witnesses; but this opinion, though maintained
on strong and plausible grounds, is not generally adopted. If,
then, he did not write from his own personal knowledge, the
question is, what is the legal character of his testimony?
</p>

<p>
§ 22. If it were <q>the result of inquiries, made under competent
public authority, concerning matters in which the public
are concerned</q><note place='foot'>2 Phillips on Evidence, p. 95, (9th edition.)</note> it would possess every legal attribute of an
inquisition, and, as such, would be legally admissible in evidence,
in a court of justice. To entitle such results, however, to our
full confidence, it is not necessary that they should be obtained
under a legal commission; it is sufficient if the inquiry is
gravely undertaken and pursued, by a person of competent
intelligence, sagacity and integrity. The request of a person in
authority, or a desire to serve the public, are, to all moral
intents, as sufficient a motive as a legal commission.<note place='foot'>When Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury, in shooting at deer with a cross-bow,
in Bramsil park, accidentally killed the keeper, King James I. by a letter dated
Oct. 3, 1621, requested the Lord Keeper, the Lord Chief Justice, and others, to
inquire into the circumstances and consider the case and <q>the scandal that may
have risen thereupon,</q> and to certify the King what it may amount to. Could there
be any reasonable doubt of their report of the facts, thus ascertained? See Spelman's
Posthumous Works, p. 121.</note> Thus,
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
we know that when complaint is made to the head of a department,
of official misconduct or abuse, existing in some remote
quarter, nothing is more common than to send some confidential
person to the spot, to ascertain the facts and report them to
the department; and this report is confidently adopted as the
basis of its discretionary action, in the correction of the abuse,
or the removal of the offender. Indeed, the result of any
grave inquiry is equally certain to receive our confidence, though
it may have been voluntarily undertaken, if the party making it
had access to the means of complete and satisfactory information
upon the subject.<note place='foot'>The case of the ill-fated steamer President furnishes an example of this sort of
inquiry. This vessel, it is well-known, sailed from New York for London in the
month of March, 1841 having on board many passengers, some of whom were highly
connected. The ship was soon overtaken by a storm, after which she was never
heard of. A few months afterwards a solemn inquiry was instituted by three
gentlemen of respectability, one of whom was a British admiral, another was agent
for the underwriters at Lloyd's, and the other a government packet agent, concerning
the time, circumstances and causes of that disaster; the result of which
was communicated to the public, under their hands. This document received
universal confidence, and no further inquiry was made.</note> If, therefore, Luke's Gospel were to be
regarded only as the work of a contemporary historian, it would
be entitled to our confidence. But it is more than this. It is
the result of careful inquiry and examination, made by a person
of science, intelligence and education, concerning subjects which
he was perfectly competent to investigate, and as to many of
which he was peculiarly skilled, they being cases of the cure of
maladies; subjects, too, of which he already had the perfect
knowledge of a contemporary, and perhaps an eye-witness, but
beyond doubt, familiar with the parties concerned in the transactions,
and belonging to the community in which the events
transpired, which were in the mouths of all; and the narrative,
moreover, drawn up for the especial use, and probably at the
request, of a man of distinction, whom it would not be for the
interest nor safety of the writer to deceive or mislead. Such a
document certainly possesses all the moral attributes of an inquest
of office, or of any other official investigation of facts; and
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
as such is entitled, <hi rend='italic'>in foro conscientiæ</hi>, to be adduced as original,
competent and satisfactory evidence of the matters it contains.
</p>

<p>
§ 23. <hi rend='smallcaps'>John</hi>, the last of the evangelists, was the son of
Zebedee, a fisherman of the town of Bethsaida, on the sea of
Galilee. His father appears to have been a respectable man
in his calling, owning his vessel and having hired servants.<note place='foot'>Mark i. 20.</note>
His mother, too, was among those who followed Jesus and
<q>ministered unto him<note place='foot'>John xix. 26, 27.</note>;</q> and to John himself, Jesus, when on
the cross, confided the care and support of his own mother.<note place='foot'>John xiii. 23.</note>
This disciple also seems to have been favourably known to the
high priest, and to have influence in his family; by means of
which he had the privilege of being present in his palace at
the examination of his Master, and of introducing also Peter,
his friend.<note place='foot'>Matt. xxvii. 55, 56; Mark xv. 40, 41.</note> He was the youngest of the apostles, was eminently
the object of our Lord's regard and confidence; was on
various occasions admitted to free and intimate intercourse
with him; and is described as <q>the disciple whom Jesus loved.</q><note place='foot'>John xviii. 15, 16.</note>
Hence he was present at several scenes, to which most of the
others were not admitted. He alone, in company with Peter
and James, was present at the resurrection of Jairus's daughter,
at the transfiguration on the mount, and at the agony of our
Saviour in the garden of Gethsemane.<note place='foot'>Luke viii. 51; Matt. xvii. 1, and xxvi. 37.</note> He was the only apostle
who followed Jesus to the cross, he was the first of them at the
sepulchre, and he was present at the several appearances of our
Lord after his resurrection. These circumstances, together with
his intimate friendship with the mother of Jesus, especially
qualify him to give a circumstantial and authentic account of
the life of his Master. After the ascension of Christ, and the
effusion of the Holy Spirit on the day of Pentecost, John
became one of the chief apostles of the circumcision, exercising
his ministry in and near Jerusalem. From ecclesiastical history
we learn that, after the death of Mary the mother of Jesus,
he proceeded to Asia Minor, where he founded and presided
over seven churches, in as many cities, but resided chiefly at
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
Ephesus. Thence he was banished, in Domitian's reign, to the
isle of Patmos, where he wrote his Revelation. On the accession
of Nerva he was freed from exile, and returned to Ephesus,
where he wrote his Gospel and Epistles, and died at the age of
one hundred years, about A.D. 100, in the third year of the
emperor Trajan.<note place='foot'>This account is abridged from Horne's Introd. vol. iv. pp. 286-288.</note>
</p>

<p>
§ 24. The learned are not agreed as to the time when the
Gospel of John was written, some dating it as early as the
year 68, others as late as the year 98; but it is generally conceded
to have been written after all the others. That it could
not have been the work of some Platonic Christian of a subsequent
age, as some have without evidence asserted, is manifest
from references to it by some of the early fathers, and from the
concurring testimony of many other writers of the ancient
Christian church.<note place='foot'>Horne's Introd. vol. iv. p. 289, and authors there cited.</note>
</p>

<p>
§ 25. That it was written either with especial reference to
the Gentiles, or at a period when very many of them had
become converts to Christianity, is inferred from the various
explanations it contains, beyond the other Gospels, which could
have been necessary only to persons unacquainted with Jewish
names and customs.<note place='foot'>See, among others, John i. 38, 41, and ii. 6, 13, and iv. 9, and xi. 55.</note> And that it was written after all the
others, and to supply their omissions, is concluded, not only
from the uniform tradition and belief in the church, but from
his studied omission of most of the transactions noticed by the
others, and from his care to mention several incidents which
they have not recorded. That their narratives were known to
him, is too evident to admit of doubt; while his omission to
repeat what they had already stated, or, where he does mention
the same things, his relating them in a brief and cursory
manner, affords incidental but strong testimony that he regarded
their accounts as faithful and true.<note place='foot'>See Horne's Introd. vol. iv. pp. 297, 298.</note>
</p>

<p>
§ 26. Such are the brief histories of the men, whose narratives
we are to examine and compare; conducting the examination
and weighing the testimony by the same rules and principles
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
which govern our tribunals of justice in similar cases. These
tribunals are in such cases governed by the following fundamental
rule:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>In trials of fact, by oral testimony, the proper inquiry is not
whether it is possible that the testimony may be false, but whether
there is sufficient probability that it is true.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
It should be observed that the subject of inquiry is matter of
fact, and not of abstract mathematical truth. The latter alone
is susceptible of that high degree of proof, usually termed
demonstration, which excludes the possibility of error, and
which therefore may reasonably be required in support of every
mathematical deduction. But the proof of matters of fact rests
upon moral evidence alone; by which is meant not merely that
species of evidence which is employed in cases respecting moral
conduct, but all the evidence which we do not obtain either
from our own senses, from intuition, or from demonstration.
In the ordinary affairs of life we do not require nor expect
demonstrative evidence, because it is inconsistent with the
nature of matters of fact, and to insist on its production would
be unreasonable and absurd. And it makes no difference,
whether the facts to be proved relate to this life or to the next,
the nature of the evidence required being in both cases the
same. The error of the sceptic consists in pretending or supposing
that there is a difference in the nature of the evidence,
where there is no difference in the nature of the things to be
proved; and in demanding demonstrative evidence concerning
things which are not susceptible of any other than moral evidence
alone, and of which the utmost that can be said is that
there is no reasonable doubt of their truth.<note place='foot'>See Gambier's Guide to the Study of Moral Evidence, p. 121.</note>
</p>

<p>
§ 27. In proceeding to weigh the evidence of any proposition
of fact, the previous question to be determined is, <emph>when</emph> may it
be said to be proved? The answer to this question is furnished
by another rule of municipal law, which may be thus stated:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>A proposition of fact is proved, when its truth is established by
competent and satisfactory evidence.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
By competent evidence, is meant such as the nature of the
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
thing to be proved requires; and by satisfactory evidence, is
meant that amount of proof, which ordinarily satisfies an unprejudiced
mind, beyond any reasonable doubt. The circumstances
which will amount to this degree of proof can never be previously
defined; the only legal test to which they can be subjected
is, their sufficiency to satisfy the mind and conscience of
a man of common prudence and discretion, and so to convince
him, that he would venture to act upon that conviction in
matters of the highest concern and importance to his own
interest.<note place='foot'>1 Stark. Evid. pp. 514, 577; 1 Greenl. on Evid. §§ 1, 2; Wills on Circumstantial
Evid., p. 2; Whately's Logic, b. iv. ch. iii. § 1.</note> If, therefore, the subject is a problem in mathematics,
its truth is to be shown by the certainty of demonstrative
evidence. But if it is a question of fact in human
affairs, nothing more than moral evidence can be required, for
this is the best evidence which, from the nature of the case, is
attainable. Now as the facts, stated in Scripture History, are
not of the former kind, but are cognizable by the senses, they
may be said to be proved when they are established by that
kind and degree of evidence which, as we have just observed,
would, in the affairs of human life, satisfy the mind and conscience
of a common man. When we have this degree of
evidence, it is unreasonable to require more. A juror would
violate his oath, if he should refuse to acquit or condemn a
person charged with an offence, where this measure of proof
was adduced.
</p>

<p>
§ 28. Proceeding further, to inquire whether the facts related
by the Four Evangelists are proved by competent and satisfactory
evidence, we are led, first, to consider on which side lies
the burden of establishing the credibility of the witnesses.
On this point the municipal law furnishes a rule, which is
of constant application in all trials by jury, and is indeed the
dictate of that charity which thinketh no evil.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>In the absence of circumstances which generate suspicion,
every witness is to be presumed credible, until the contrary is
shown; the burden of impeaching his credibility lying on the
objector.<note place='foot'>See 1 Stark. Evid. pp. 16, 480, 521.</note></hi>
</quote>

<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>

<p>
This rule serves to show the injustice with which the writers
of the Gospels have ever been treated by infidels; an injustice
silently acquiesced in even by Christians; in requiring the
Christian affirmatively, and by positive evidence, <hi rend='italic'>aliunde</hi>, to
establish the credibility of his witnesses above all others, before
their testimony is entitled to be considered, and in permitting
the testimony of a single profane writer, alone and uncorroborated,
to outweigh that of any single Christian. This is
not the course in courts of chancery, where the testimony of a
single witness is never permitted to outweigh the oath even of
the defendant himself, interested as he is in the cause; but, on
the contrary, if the plaintiff, after having required the oath of
his adversary, cannot overthrow it by something more than
the oath of one witness, however credible, it must stand as
evidence against him. But the Christian writer seems, by the
usual course of the argument, to have been deprived of the
common presumption of charity in his favour; and reversing the
ordinary rule of administering justice in human tribunals, his
testimony is unjustly presumed to be false, until it is proved
to be true. This treatment moreover, has been applied to them
all in a body; and, without due regard to the fact, that, being
independent historians, writing at different periods, they are
entitled to the support of each other: they have been treated, in
the argument, almost as if the New Testament were the entire
production, at once, of a body of men, conspiring by a joint
fabrication, to impose a false religion upon the world. It is
time that this injustice should cease, that the testimony of the
evangelists should be admitted to be true, until it can be
disproved by those who would impugn it; that the silence of
one sacred writer on any point, should no more detract from
his own veracity or that of the other historians, than the like
circumstance is permitted to do among profane writers; and
that the Four Evangelists should be admitted in corroboration
of each other, as readily as Josephus and Tacitus, or Polybius
and Livy.<note place='foot'>This subject has been treated by Dr. Chalmers, in his Evidences of the
Christian Revelation, chapter iii. The following extract from his observations will
not be unacceptable to the reader. <q>In other cases, when we compare the narratives of contemporary historians, it is not expected that all the circumstances alluded
to by one will be taken notice of by the rest; and it often happens that an event or
a custom is admitted upon the faith of a single historian; and the silence of all
other writers is not suffered to attach suspicion or discredit to his testimony. It is
an allowed principle, that a scrupulous resemblance betwixt two histories is very
far from necessary to their being held consistent with one another. And what is
more, it sometimes happens that, with contemporary historians, there may be an
apparent contradiction, and the credit of both parties remain as entire and unsuspicious
as before. Posterity is, in these cases, disposed to make the most
liberal allowances. Instead of calling it a contradiction, they often call it a
difficulty. They are sensible that, in many instances a seeming variety of statement
has, upon a more extensive knowledge of ancient history, admitted of a perfect
reconciliation. Instead, then, of referring the difficulty in question to the inaccuracy
or bad faith of any of the parties, they, with more justness and more
modesty, refer it to their own ignorance, and to that obscurity which necessarily
hangs over the history of every remote age. These principles are suffered to have
great influence in every secular investigation; but so soon as, instead of a secular, it
becomes a sacred investigation, every ordinary principle is abandoned, and the
suspicion annexed to the teachers of religion is carried to the dereliction of all that
candour and liberality with which every other document of antiquity is judged of
and appreciated. How does it happen that the authority of Josephus should be
acquiesced in as a first principle, while every step, in the narrative of the evangelists,
must have foreign testimony to confirm and support it? How comes it, that the
silence of Josephus should be construed into an impeachment of the testimony of
the evangelists, while it is never admitted, for a single moment, that the silence of
the evangelists can impart the slightest blemish to the testimony of Josephus?
How comes it, that the supposition of two Philips in one family should throw a
damp of scepticism over the Gospel narrative, while the only circumstance which
renders that supposition necessary is the single testimony of Josephus; in which
very testimony it is necessarily implied that there are two Herods in that same
family? How comes it, that the evangelists, with as much internal, and a vast
deal more of external evidence in their favour, should be made to stand before
Josephus, like so many prisoners at the bar of justice? In any other case, we are
convinced that this would be looked upon as <emph>rough handling</emph>. But we are not sorry
for it. It has given more triumph and confidence to the argument. And it is no
small addition to our faith, that its first teachers have survived an examination,
which, in point of rigour and severity, we believe to be quite unexampled in the
annals of criticism.</q> See Chalmers's Evidences, pp. 72-74.</note>
</p>

<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>

<p>
§ 29. But if the burden of establishing the credibility of
the evangelists were devolved on those who affirm the truth
of their narratives, it is still capable of a ready moral demonstration,
when we consider the nature and character of the
testimony, and the essential marks of difference between true
narratives of facts and the creations of falsehood. It is universally
admitted that the credit to be given to witnesses depends
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
chiefly on their ability to discern and comprehend what was
before them, their opportunities for observation, the degree of
accuracy with which they are accustomed to mark passing
events, and their integrity in relating them. The rule of municipal
law on this subject embraces all these particulars, and is
thus stated by a legal text-writer of the highest repute.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The credit due to the testimony of witnesses depends upon, firstly,
their honesty; secondly, their ability; thirdly, their number and the
consistency of their testimony; fourthly, the conformity of their
testimony with experience; and fifthly, the coincidence of their testimony
with collateral circumstances.</hi><note place='foot'>See 1 Stark. Evid. pp. 480, 545.</note>
</quote>

<p>
Let the evangelists be tried by these tests.
</p>

<p>
§ 30. And <emph>first</emph>, as to their <emph>honesty</emph>. Here they are entitled to
the benefit of the general course of human experience, that men
ordinarily speak the truth, when they have no prevailing motive
or inducement to the contrary. This presumption, to which we
have before alluded, is applied in courts of justice, even to
witnesses whose integrity is not wholly free from suspicion;
much more is it applicable to the evangelists, whose testimony
went against all their worldly interests. The great truths
which the apostles declared, were, that Christ had risen from
the dead, and that only through repentance from sin, and faith
in him, could men hope for salvation. This doctrine they
asserted with one voice, everywhere, not only under the greatest
discouragements, but in the face of the most appalling terrors
that can be presented to the mind of man. Their master had
recently perished as a malefactor, by the sentence of a public
tribunal. His religion sought to overthrow the religions of the
whole world. The laws of every country were against the
teachings of his disciples. The interests and passions of all the
rulers and great men in the world were against them. The
fashion of the world was against them. Propagating this new
faith, even in the most inoffensive and peaceful manner, they
could expect nothing but contempt, opposition, revilings, bitter
persecutions, stripes, imprisonments, torments and cruel deaths.
Yet this faith they zealously did propagate; and all these
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
miseries they endured undismayed, nay, rejoicing. As one
after another was put to a miserable death, the survivors only
prosecuted their work with increased vigour and resolution. The
annals of military warfare afford scarcely an example of the like
heroic constancy, patience and unblenching courage. They
had every possible motive to review carefully the grounds of their
faith, and the evidences of the great facts and truths which
they asserted; and these motives were pressed upon their
attention with the most melancholy and terrific frequency.
It was therefore impossible that they could have persisted in
affirming the truths they have narrated, had not Jesus actually
risen from the dead, and had they not known this fact as
certainly as they knew any other fact.<note place='foot'>If the witnesses could be supposed to have been biassed, this would destroy
their testimony to matters of fact; it would only detract from the weight of their
judgment in matters of opinion. The rule of law on this subject has been thus
stated by Dr. Lushington: <q>When you examine the testimony of witnesses nearly
connected with the parties, and there is nothing very peculiar tending to destroy
their credit, when they depose to mere facts, their testimony is to be believed;
when they depose as to matter of opinion, it is to be received with suspicion.</q>
Dillon <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Dillon, 3 Curteis's Eccl. Rep. pp. 96, 102.</note> If it were morally
possible for them to have been deceived in this matter, every
human motive operated to lead them to discover and avow their
error. To have persisted in so gross a falsehood, after it was
known to them, was not only to encounter, for life, all the evils
which man could inflict, from without, but to endure also the
pangs of inward and conscious guilt, with no hope of future
peace, no testimony of a good conscience, no expectation of
honour or esteem among men, no hope of happiness in this life,
or in the world to come.
</p>

<p>
§ 31. Such conduct in the apostles would moreover have
been utterly irreconcilable with the fact, that they possessed
the ordinary constitution of our common nature. Yet their
lives do show them to have been men like all others of our
race; swayed by the same motives, animated by the same
hopes, affected by the same joys, subdued by the same sorrows,
agitated by the same fears, and subject to the same passions,
temptations and infirmities, as ourselves. And their writings
show them to have been men of vigorous understandings. If
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
then their testimony was not true, there was no possible motive
for its fabrication.
</p>

<p>
§ 32. It would also have been irreconcilable with the fact
that they were good men. But it is impossible to read their
writings, and not feel that we are conversing with men eminently
holy, and of tender consciences, with men acting under an
abiding sense of the presence and omniscience of God, and of
their accountability to him, living in his fear, and walking in
his ways. Now, though, in a single instance, a good man may
fall, when under strong temptations, yet he is not found persisting,
for years, in deliberate falsehood, asserted with the
most solemn appeals to God, without the slightest temptation
or motive, and against all the opposing interests which reign in
the human breast. If, on the contrary, they are supposed to
have been bad men, it is incredible that such men should have
chosen this form of imposture; enjoining, as it does, unfeigned
repentance, the utter forsaking and abhorrence of all falsehood
and of every other sin, the practice of daily self-denial, self-abasement
and self-sacrifice, the crucifixion of the flesh with all
its earthly appetites and desires, indifference to the honours,
and hearty contempt of the vanities of the world; and inculcating
perfect purity of heart and life, and intercourse of the
soul with heaven. It is incredible, that bad men should invent
falsehoods, to promote the religion of the God of truth. The
supposition is suicidal. If they did believe in a future state of
retribution, a heaven and a hell hereafter, they took the most
certain course, if false witnesses, to secure the latter for their
portion. And if, still being bad men, they did not believe in
future punishment, how came they to invent falsehoods, the
direct and certain tendency of which was to destroy all their
prospects of worldly honour and happiness, and to ensure their
misery in this life? From these absurdities there is no escape,
but in the perfect conviction and admission that they were
good men, testifying to that which they had carefully observed
and considered, and well knew to be true.<note place='foot'>This subject has been so fully treated by Dr. Paley, in his view of the Evidences
of Christianity, Part I., Prop. I., that is it unnecessary to pursue it farther in this
place.</note>
</p>

<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>

<p>
§ 33. In the <emph>second</emph> place, as to their <emph>ability</emph>. The text writer
before cited observes, that the ability of a witness to speak
the truth, depends on the opportunities which he has had for
observing the fact, the accuracy of his powers of discerning,
and the faithfulness of his memory in retaining the facts, once
observed and known.<note place='foot'>1 Stark. Evid., pp. 483, 548.</note> Of the latter trait, in these witnesses,
we of course know nothing; nor have we any traditionary
information in regard to the accuracy of their powers of discerning.
But we may well suppose that in these respects they
were like the generality of their countrymen, until the contrary
is shown by an objector. It is always to be presumed that men
are honest, and of sound mind, and of the average and ordinary
degree of intelligence. This is not the judgment of mere
charity; it is also the uniform presumption of the law of the
land; a presumption which is always allowed freely and fully to
operate, until the fact is shown to be otherwise, by the party
who denies the applicability of this presumption to the particular
case in question. Whenever an objection is raised in opposition
to the ordinary presumptions of law, or to the ordinary
experience of mankind, the burden of proof is devolved on the
objector, by the common and ordinary rules of evidence, and of
practice in courts. No lawyer is permitted to argue in disparagement
of the intelligence or integrity of a witness, against
whom the case itself afforded no particle of testimony. This is
sufficient for our purpose, in regard to these witnesses. But
more than this is evident, from the minuteness of their narratives,
and from their history. Matthew was trained, by his
calling, to habits of severe investigation and suspicious scrutiny;
and Luke's profession demanded an exactness of observation
equally close and searching. The other two evangelists, it has
been well remarked, were as much too unlearned to forge the
story of their Master's life, as these were too learned and acute
to be deceived by imposture.
</p>

<p>
§ 34. In the <emph>third</emph> place, as to their <emph>number</emph> and the <emph>consistency</emph>
of their testimony. The character of their narratives is
like that of all other true witnesses, containing, as Dr. Paley
observes, substantial truth, under circumstantial variety. There
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
is enough of discrepancy to show that there could have been no
previous concert among them; and at the same time such substantial
agreement as to show that they all were independent
narrators of the same great transaction, as the events actually
occurred. That they conspired to impose falsehood upon the
world is, moreover, utterly inconsistent with the supposition
that they were honest men; a fact, to the proofs of which we
have already adverted. But if they were bad men, still the idea
of any conspiracy among them is negatived, not only by the
discrepancies alluded to, but by many other circumstances
which will be mentioned hereafter; from all which, it is manifest
that if they concerted a false story, they sought its accomplishment
by a mode quite the opposite to that which all others are
found to pursue, to attain the same end. On this point the
profound remark of an eminent writer is to our purpose; that
<q>in a number of concurrent testimonies, where there has been
no previous concert, there is a probability distinct from that
which may be termed the sum of the probabilities resulting
from the testimonies of the witnesses, a probability which
would remain, even though the witnesses were of such a character
as to merit no faith at all. This probability arises
from the concurrence itself. That such a concurrence should
spring from chance, is as one to infinite; that is, in other
words, morally impossible. If therefore concert be excluded,
there remains no cause but the reality of the fact.</q><note place='foot'>Campbell's Philosophy of Rhetoric, c. v. b. 1. Part 3, p. 125. Whately's
Rhetoric, Part 1. ch. 2. § 4. 1 Stark. Evid., p. 487.</note>
</p>

<p>
§ 35. The discrepancies between the narratives of the several
evangelists, when carefully examined, will not be found sufficient
to invalidate their testimony. Many seeming contradictions
will prove, upon closer scrutiny, to be in substantial agreement;
and it may be confidently asserted that there are none that
will not yield, under fair and just criticism. If these different
accounts of the same transactions were in strict verbal conformity
with each other, the argument against their credibility
would be much stronger. All that is asked for these witnesses
is, that their testimony may be regarded as we regard the testimony
of men in the ordinary affairs of life. This they are
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
justly entitled to; and this no honourable adversary can refuse.
We might, indeed, take higher ground than this, and confidently
claim for them the severest scrutiny; but our present purpose
is merely to try their veracity by the ordinary tests of truth,
admitted in human tribunals.
</p>

<p>
§ 36. If the evidence of the evangelists is to be rejected
because of a few discrepancies among them, we shall be
obliged to discard that of many of the contemporaneous histories
on which we are accustomed to rely. Dr. Paley has
noticed the contradiction between Lord Clarendon and Burnett
and others in regard to Lord Strafford's execution; the former
stating that he was condemned to be hanged, which was done
on the same day; and the latter all relating that on a Saturday
he was sentenced to the block, and was beheaded on the following
Monday. Another striking instance of discrepancy has
since occurred, in the narratives of the different members of the
royal family of France, of their flight from Paris to Varennes,
in 1792. These narratives, ten in number, and by eye-witnesses
and personal actors in the transactions they relate,
contradict each other, some on trivial and some on more
essential points, but in every case in a wonderful and inexplicable
manner.<note place='foot'>See the Quarterly Review, vol. xxviii. p. 465. These narrators were, the
Duchess D'Angoulême herself, the two Messrs. De Bouillè, the Duc De Choiseul,
his servant, James Brissac, Messrs. De Damas and Deslons, two of the officers commanding
detachments on the road, Messrs. De Moustier and Valori, the garde du
corps who accompanied the king, and finally M. de Fontanges, archbishop of
Toulouse, who though not himself a party to the transaction, is supposed to have
written from the information of the queen. An earlier instance of similar discrepancy
is mentioned by Sully. After the battle of Aumale, in which Henry IV.
was wounded, when the officers were around the king's bed, conversing upon the
events of the day, there were not two who agreed in the recital of the most particular
circumstances of the action. D'Aubigné, a contemporary writer, does not even
mention the king's wound, though it was the only one he ever received in his life.
See Memoirs of Sully, vol. i. p. 245. If we treated these narratives as sceptics
would have us treat these of the sacred writers, what evidence should we have of
any battle at Aumale, or of any flight to Varennes?</note> Yet these contradictions do not, in the
general public estimation, detract from the integrity of the
narrators, nor from the credibility of their relations. In the
points in which they agree, and which constitute the great
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
body of their narratives, their testimony is of course not
doubted; where they differ, we reconcile them as well as we
may; and where this cannot be done at all, we follow that
light which seems to us the clearest. Upon the principles of
the sceptic, we should be bound utterly to disbelieve them all.
On the contrary, we apply to such cases the rules which, in
daily experience, our judges instruct juries to apply, in weighing
and reconciling the testimony of different witnesses; and
which the courts themselves observe, in comparing and reconciling
different and sometimes discordant reports of the same
decisions. This remark applies especially to some alleged
discrepancies in the reports which the several evangelists have
given of the same discourses of our Lord.<note place='foot'>Far greater discrepancies can be found in the different reports of the same
case, given by the reporters of legal judgments than are shown among the evangelists;
and yet we do not consider them as detracting from the credit of the reporters,
to whom we still resort with confidence, as to good authority. Some of
these discrepancies seem utterly irreconcilable. Thus, in a case, 45 Edw. III. 19,
where the question was upon a gift of lands to J. de C. with Joan, the sister of the
donor, and to their heirs, Fitzherbert (tit. <hi rend='italic'>Tail</hi>, 14) says it was adjudged fee simple,
and not frankmarriage; Statham (tit. <hi rend='italic'>Tail</hi>) says it was adjudged a gift in frankmarriage;
while Brook (tit. <hi rend='italic'>Frankmarriage</hi>) says it was not decided. (Vid. 10 Co.
118.) Others are irreconcilable, until the aid of a third reporter is invoked. Thus,
in the case of Cooper v. Franklin, Croke says it was not decided, but adjourned; (Cro.
Jac. 100); Godbolt says it was decided in a certain way, which he mentions;
(Godb. 269); Moor also reports it as decided, but gives a different account of the
question raised; (Moor, 848); while Bulstrode gives a still different report of the
judgment of the court, which he says was delivered by Croke himself. But by his
account it further appears, that the case was previously twice argued; and thus it
at length results that the other reporters relate only what fell from the court on
each of the previous occasions. Other similar examples may be found in 1 Dougl.
6, n. compared with 5 East, 475, n. in the case of Galbraith <hi rend='italic'>v</hi>. Neville; and in that
of Stoughton <hi rend='italic'>v</hi>. Reynolds, reported by Fortescue, Strange, and in Cases temp.
Hardwicke. (See 3 Barnw. &amp; Ald. 247, 248.) Indeed, the books abound in such
instances. Other discrepancies are found in the names of the same litigating parties,
as differently given by reporters; such as, Putt <hi rend='italic'>v</hi>. Roster, (2 Mod. 318); Foot <hi rend='italic'>v</hi>.
Rastall, (Skin. 49), and Putt <hi rend='italic'>v</hi>. Royston, (2 Show. 211); also, Hosdell <hi rend='italic'>v</hi>. Harris, (2
Keb. 462); Hodson <hi rend='italic'>v</hi>. Harwich, (Ib. 533), and Hodsden <hi rend='italic'>v</hi>. Harridge, (2 Saund. 64),
and a multitude of others, which are universally admitted to mean the same cases,
even when they are not precisely within the rule of <hi rend='italic'>idem sonans</hi>. These diversities,
it is well known, have never detracted in the slightest degree from the estimation in
which the reporters are all deservedly held, as authors of merit, enjoying, to this
day, the confidence of the profession. Admitting now, for the sake of argument,
(what is not conceded in fact,) that diversities equally great exist among the sacred
writers; how can we consistently, and as lawyers, raise any serious objection against
them on that account, or treat them in any manner different from that which we
observe towards our own reporters?</note>
</p>

<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>

<p>
§ 37. In the <emph>fourth</emph> place, as to the <emph>conformity of their testimony
with experience</emph>. The title of the evangelists to full credit
for veracity would be readily conceded by the objector, if the
facts they relate were such as ordinarily occur in human
experience. But they also relate events which were miraculous,
or out of the ordinary course of human experience, and on
this circumstance an argument is founded against their credibility.
Miracles, say the objectors, are impossible; and therefore
the evangelists were either deceivers or deceived; and in
either case their narratives are unworthy of belief. Spinosa's
argument against the possibility of miracles, was founded on
the broad and bold assumption that all things are governed by
immutable laws, or fixed modes of motion and relation, termed
the laws of nature, by which God himself is of necessity bound.
This erroneous assumption is the tortoise, on which stands the
elephant that upholds his system of atheism. He does not
inform us who made these immutable laws, nor whence they
derive their binding force and irresistible operation. The
argument supposes that the creator of all things first made a
code of laws, and then put it out of his own power to change
them. The scheme of Mr. Hume is but another form of the
same error. He deduces the existence of such immutable laws
from the uniform course of human experience. This, he affirms,
is our only guide in reasoning concerning matters of fact; and
whatever is contrary to human experience, he pronounces
incredible.<note place='foot'><p>Mr. Hume's argument is thus refuted by Lord Brougham. <q rend='pre'>Here are two
answers, to which the doctrine proposed by Mr. Hume is exposed, and either
appears sufficient to shake it.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'><emph>First</emph>&mdash;Our belief in the uniformity of the laws of nature rests not altogether
upon our own experience. We believe no man ever was raised from the dead,&mdash;not
merely because we ourselves never saw it, for indeed that would be a very
limited ground of deduction; and our belief was fixed on the subject long before
we had any considerable experience,&mdash;fixed chiefly by authority,&mdash;that is, by
deference to other men's experience. We found our confident belief in this
negative position partly, perhaps chiefly, upon the testimony of others; and at all
events, our belief that in times before our own the same position held good, must
of necessity be drawn from our trusting relations of other men&mdash;that is, it
depends upon the evidence of testimony. If, then, the existence of the law of
nature is proved, in great part at least, by such evidence, can we wholly reject the
like evidence when it comes to prove an exception to the rule&mdash;a deviation from
the law? The more numerous are the cases of the law being kept&mdash;the more
rare those of its being broken&mdash;the more scrupulous certainly ought we to be in
admitting the proofs of the breach. But that testimony is capable of making good
the proof there seems no doubt. In truth, the degree of excellence and of strength
to which testimony may arise seems almost indefinite. There is hardly any
cogency which it is not capable by possible supposition of attaining. The endless
multiplication of witnesses,&mdash;the unbounded variety of their habits of thinking,
their prejudices, their interests,&mdash;afford the means of conceiving the force of their
testimony, augmented <hi rend='italic'>ad infinitum</hi>, because these circumstances afford the means
of diminishing indefinitely the chances of their being mistaken, all misled, or all
combining to deceive us. Let any man try to calculate the chances of a thousand
persons who come from different quarters, and never saw each other before,
and who all vary in their habits, stations, opinions, interests,&mdash;being mistaken or
combining to deceive us, when they give the same account of an event as
having happened before their eyes,&mdash;these chances are many hundreds of thousands
to one. And yet we can conceive them multiplied indefinitely; for one hundred
thousand such witnesses may in all like manner bear the same testimony; and they
may all tell us their story within twenty-four hours after the transaction, and in the
next parish. And yet, according to Mr. Hume's argument, we are bound to disbelieve
them all, because they speak to a thing contrary to our own experience, and
to the accounts which other witnesses had formerly given us of the law of nature,
and which our forefathers had handed down to us as derived from witnesses who
lived in the old time before them. It is unnecessary to add that no testimony of
the witnesses, whom we are supposing to concur in their relation, contradicts any
testimony of our own senses. If it did, the argument would resemble Archbishop
Tillotson's upon the Real Presence, and our disbelief would be at once warranted.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'><emph>Secondly</emph>&mdash;This leads us to the next objection to which Mr. Hume's argument is
liable, and which we have in part anticipated while illustrating the first. He
requires us to withhold our belief in circumstances which would force every man of
common understanding to lend his assent, and to act upon the supposition of the
story told being true. For, suppose either such numbers of various witnesses as
we have spoken of; or, what is perhaps stronger, suppose a miracle reported to us,
first by a number of relators, and then by three or four of the very soundest judges
and most incorruptibly honest men we know,&mdash;men noted for their difficult belief of
wonders, and, above all, steady unbelievers in miracles, without any bias in favour
of religion, but rather accustomed to doubt, if not disbelieve,&mdash;most people would
lend an easy belief to any miracles thus vouched. But let us add this circumstance,
that a friend on his death-bed had been attended by us, and that we had told him a
fact known only to ourselves,&mdash;something that we had secretly done the very
moment before we told it to the dying man, and which to no other being we had
ever revealed,&mdash;and that the credible witnesses we are supposing, informed us that
the deceased appeared to them, conversed with them, remained with them a day or
two, accompanying them, and to avouch the fact of his reappearance on this earth,
communicated to them the secret of which we had made him the sole depository
the moment before his death;&mdash;according to Mr. Hume, we are bound rather to
believe, not only that those credible witnesses deceive us, or that those sound and
unprejudiced men were themselves deceived, and fancied things without real
existence, but further, that they all hit by chance upon the discovery of a real
secret, known only to ourselves and the dead man. Mr. Hume's argument requires
us to believe this as the lesser improbability of the two&mdash;as less unlikely than the
rising of one from the dead; and yet every one must feel convinced, that were he
placed in the situation we have been figuring, he would not only lend his belief to
the relation, but if the relators accompanied it with a special warning from the
deceased person to avoid a certain contemplated act, he would, acting upon the
belief of their story, take the warning, and avoid doing the forbidden deed. Mr.
Hume's argument makes no exception. This is its scope; and whether he chooses
to push it thus far or no, all miracles are of necessity denied by it, without the
least regard to the kind or the quantity of the proof on which they are rested; and
the testimony which we have supposed, accompanied by the test or check we have
supposed, would fall within the grasp of the argument just as much and as clearly
as any other miracle avouched by more ordinary combinations of evidence.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>The use of Mr. Hume's argument is this, and it is an important and a valuable
one. It teaches us to sift closely and rigorously the evidence for miraculous
events. It bids us remember that the probabilities are always, and must always be
incomparably greater against, than for, the truth of these relations, because it is
always far more likely that the testimony should be mistaken or false, than that
the general laws of nature should be suspended. Further than this the doctrine
cannot in soundness of reason be carried. It does not go the length of proving
that those general laws cannot, by the force of human testimony, be shown to have
been, in a particular instance, and with a particular purpose, suspended.</q> See his
Discourse of Natural Theology, Note 5, p. 210-214. (Ed. 1835.)
</p>
<p>
Laplace, in his Essai sur les Probabilités, maintains that, the more extraordinary
the fact attested, the greater the probability of error or falsehood in the
attestor. Simple good sense, he says, suggests this; and the calculation of probabilities
confirms its suggestion. There are some things, he adds, so extraordinary,
that nothing can balance their improbability. The position here laid down is, that
the probability of error, or of the falsehood of testimony, becomes in <emph>proportion</emph>
greater, as the fact which is attested is more extraordinary. And hence a fact
extraordinary in the highest possible degree, becomes in the highest possible degree
improbable; or so much so, that nothing can counterbalance its improbability.
</p>
<p>
This argument has been made much use of, to discredit the evidence of miracles,
and the truth of that divine religion which is attested by them. But however
sound it may be, in one sense, this application of it is fallacious. The fallacy lies
in the meaning affixed to the term <q>extraordinary.</q> If Laplace means a fact
extraordinary <emph>under</emph> its existing circumstances and relations, that is, a fact remaining
extraordinary, notwithstanding all its circumstances, the position need not
here to be controverted. But if the term means extraordinary <emph>in the abstract</emph>,
it is far from being universally true, or affording a correct test of truth, or rule
of evidence. Thus, it is extraordinary that a man should leap fifteen feet at a
bound; but not extraordinary that a strong and active man should do it, under a
sudden impulse to save his life. The former is improbable in the abstract; the
latter is rendered probable by the circumstances. So, things extraordinary, and
therefore improbable under one hypothesis, become the reverse under another.
Thus, the occurrence of a violent storm at sea, and the utterance by Jesus of the
the words, <q>Peace, be still,</q> succeeded instantly by a perfect calm, are facts which,
taken separately from each other, are not in themselves extraordinary. The connexion
between the command of Jesus and the ensuing calm, as cause and effect,
would be extraordinary and improbable if he were a mere man; but it becomes
perfectly natural and probable, when his divine power is considered. Each of those
facts is in its nature so simple and obvious, that the most ignorant person is capable
of observing it. There is nothing extraordinary in the facts themselves; and the
extraordinary coincidence, in which the miracle consists, becomes both intelligible
and probable upon the hypothesis of the Christian. (See the Christian Observer for
Oct. 1838, p. 617.) The theory of Laplace may, with the same propriety, be
applied to the creation of the world. That matter was created out of nothing is
extremely improbable, in the abstract, that is, if there is no God; and therefore
it is not to be believed. But if the existence of a Supreme Being is conceded, the
fact is perfectly credible.
</p>
<p>
Laplace was so fascinated with his theory, that he thought the calculus of probabilities
might be usefully employed in discovering the value of the different
methods resorted to, in those sciences which are in a great measure conjectural, as
medicine, agriculture, and political economy. And he proposed that there should be
kept, in every branch of the administration, an exact register of the trials made of
different measures, and of the results, whether good or bad, to which they have led.
(See the Edinburgh Review, vol. xxiii. pp 335, 336.) Napoleon, who appointed
him Minister of the Interior, has thus described him: <q>A geometrician of the
first class, he did not reach mediocrity as a statesman. He never viewed any
subject in its true light; he was always occupied with subtleties; his notions were
all problematic; and he carried into the administration the spirit of the <emph>infinitely</emph>
small.</q> See the Encyclopedia Britannica, art. Laplace, vol. xiii. p. 101. Memoires
Ecrits à Ste. Helena, i. 3. The injurious effect of deductive reasoning, upon the
minds of those who addict themselves to this method alone, to the exclusion of all
other modes of arriving at the knowledge of truth in fact, is shown with great clearness
and success, by Mr. Whewel in the ninth of the Bridgewater Treatises, book
3, ch. 6. The calculus of probabilities has been applied by some writers, to judicial
evidence; but its very slight value as a test, is clearly shown in an able article on
Presumptive Evidence, in the Law Magazine, vol. i. pp. 28-32 (New Series.)</p></note> Without stopping to examine the correctness of
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
this doctrine, as a fundamental principle in the law of evidence,
it is sufficient in this place to remark, that is contains this
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
fallacy; it excludes all knowledge derived by inference or
deduction from facts, confining us to what we derive from
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
experience alone, and thus depriving us of any knowledge,
or even rational belief, of the existence or character of God.
Nay more, it goes to prove that successive generations of men
can make no advancement in knowledge, but each must begin
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de novo</foreign>, and be limited to the results of its own experience.
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
But if we may infer, from what we see and know, that there is
a Supreme Being, by whom this world was created, we may
certainly, and with equal reason, believe him capable of works
which <emph>we</emph> have never yet known him to perform. We
may fairly conclude that the power which was originally put
forth to create the world is still constantly and without ceasing
exerted to sustain it; and that the experienced connexion
between cause and effect is but the uniform and constantly
active operation of the finger of God. Whether this uniformity
of operation extends to things beyond the limits of our observation,
is a point we cannot certainly know. Its existence in
all things that ordinarily concern us may be supposed to be
ordained as conducive to our happiness; and if the belief in a
revelation of peace and mercy from God is conducive to the
happiness of man, it is not irrational to suppose that he would
depart from his ordinary course of action, in order to give it
such attestations as should tend to secure that belief. <q>A
miracle is improbable, when we can perceive no sufficient
cause, in reference to his creatures, why the Deity should vary
his modes of operation; it ceases to be so, when such cause is
assigned.</q><note place='foot'>See Mr. Norton's <q>Discourse on the latest form of Infidelity,</q> p. 18.</note>
</p>

<p>
§ 38. But the full discussion of the subject of miracles forms
no part of the present design. Their credibility has been fully
established, and the objections of sceptics most satisfactorily
met and overthrown, by the ablest writers of our own day,
whose works are easily accessible.<note place='foot'><p>The arguments on this subject are stated in a condensed form, by Mr. Horne,
in his Introduction to the Study of the Holy Scriptures, vol. i. ch. 4, sec. 2; in
which he refers, among others, to Doctor Gregory's Letters on the Evidences of
the Christian Revelation; Dr. Campbell's Dissertation on Miracles; Vince's
Sermons on the Credibility of Miracles; Bishop Marsh's Lectures, part 6, lect. 30;
Dr. Adam's Treatise in reply to Mr. Hume; Bishop Gleig's Dissertation on
Miracles, (in the third volume of his edition of Stackhouse's History of the Bible, p.
240, &amp;c.); Dr. Key's Norissian Lectures, vol. i. See also Dr. Hopkins's Lowell
Lectures, lect. I. and II. delivered in Boston in 1844, where this topic is treated
with great perspicuity and cogency.
</p>
<p>
Among the more popular treatises on miracles, are Bogue's Essay on the Divine
Authority of the New Testament, ch. 5; Bishop Wilson's Evidences of Christianity,
vol. i. lect. 7; Bishop Sumner's Evidences, ch. 10; Gambier's Guide to the Study
of Moral Evidence, ch. v.; Mr. Norton's Discourse on the latest form of Infidelity,
and Dr. Dewey's Dudleian Lecture, delivered before Harvard University, in
May, 1836.</p></note> Thus much, however, may
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
here be remarked; that in almost every miracle related by the
evangelists, the facts, separately taken, were plain, intelligible,
transpiring in public, and about which no person of ordinary
observation would be likely to mistake. Persons blind or
crippled, who applied to Jesus for relief, were known to have
been crippled or blind for many years; they came to be cured;
he spake to them; they went away whole. Lazarus had been
dead and buried four days; Jesus called him to come forth
from the grave; he immediately came forth, and was seen alive
for a long time afterwards. In every case of healing, the
previous condition of the sufferer was known to all; all saw
his instantaneous restoration, and all witnessed the act of
Jesus in touching him, and heard his words.<note place='foot'>See Bishop Wilson's Evidences, lect. 7, p. 130.</note> All these,
separately considered, were facts, plain and simple in their
nature, easily seen and fully comprehended by persons of
common capacity and observation. If they were separately
testified to, by different witnesses of ordinary intelligence and
integrity, in any court of justice, the jury would be bound to
believe them; and a verdict, rendered contrary to the uncontradicted
testimony of credible witnesses to any one of these
plain facts, separately taken, would be liable to be set aside, as
a verdict against evidence. If one credible witness testified to
the fact, that Bartimeus was blind, according to the uniform
course of administering justice, this fact would be taken as
satisfactorily proved. So also, if his subsequent restoration to
sight were the sole fact in question, this also would be deemed
established, by the like evidence. Nor would the rule of
evidence be at all different, if the fact to be proved were the
declaration of Jesus, immediately preceding his restoration to
sight, that his faith had made him whole. In each of these
cases, each isolated fact was capable of being accurately observed,
and certainly known; and the evidence demands our
assent, precisely as the like evidence upon any other indifferent
subject. The connexion of the word or the act of Jesus with
the restoration of the blind, lame and dead, to sight, and health,
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
and life, as cause and effect, is a conclusion which our reason is
compelled to admit, from the uniformity of their concurrence,
in such a multitude of instances, as well as from the universal
conviction of all, whether friends or foes, who beheld the
miracles which he wrought. Indeed, if the truth of one of the
miracles is satisfactorily established, our belief cannot reasonably
be withheld from them all. This is the issue proposed by
Dr. Paley, in regard to the evidence of the death of Jesus upon
the cross, and his subsequent resurrection, the truth of which
he has established in an argument, incapable of refutation.
</p>

<p>
§ 39. In the <emph>fifth</emph> place, as to <emph>the coincidence of their testimony
with collateral and contemporaneous facts and circumstances</emph>.
After a witness is dead, and his moral character is forgotten,
we can ascertain it only by a close inspection of his narrative,
comparing its details with each other, and with contemporary
accounts and collateral facts. This test is much more accurate
than may at first be supposed. Every event which actually
transpires, has its appropriate relation and place in the vast complication
of circumstances, of which the affairs of men consist;
it owes its origin to the events which have preceded it, is intimately
connected with all others which occur at the same time
and place, and often with those of remote regions, and in its
turn gives birth to numberless others which succeed. In all
this almost inconceivable contexture, and seeming discord, there
is perfect harmony; and while the fact, which really happened,
tallies exactly with every other contemporaneous incident,
related to it in the remotest degree, it is not possible for the
wit of man to invent a story, which, if closely compared with
the actual occurrences of the same time and place, may not be
shown to be false.<note place='foot'>1 Stark on Evid. p. 496-499.</note> Hence it is, that a false witness will not
willingly detail any circumstances, in which his testimony will
be open to contradiction, nor multiply them where there is
danger of his being detected by a comparison of them with
other accounts, equally circumstantial. He will rather deal in
general statements and broad assertions, and if he finds it
necessary for his purpose to employ names and particular circumstances
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
in his story, he will endeavor to invent such as
shall be out of the reach of all opposing proof; and will be the
most forward and minute in details, where he knows that any
danger of contradiction is least to be apprehended.<note place='foot'>1 Stark. on Evid. p. 523.</note> Therefore
it is, that variety and minuteness of detail are usually regarded
as certain tests of sincerity, if the story, in the circumstances
related, is of a nature capable of easy refutation if it were false.
</p>

<p>
§ 40. The difference, in the detail of circumstances, between
artful or false witnesses and those who testify the truth, is
worthy of especial observation. The former are often copious
and even profuse in their statements, as far as these may have
been previously fabricated, and in relation to the principal
matter; but beyond this, all will be reserved and meagre, from
the fear of detection. Every lawyer knows how lightly the
evidence of a <foreign rend='italic'>non-mi-recordo</foreign> witness is esteemed. The testimony
of false witnesses will not be uniform in its texture, but
will be unequal, unnatural, and inconsistent. On the contrary,
in the testimony of true witnesses there is a visible and
striking naturalness of manner, and an unaffected readiness and
copiousness in the detail of circumstances, as well in one part
of the narrative as another, and evidently without the least
regard either to the facility or difficulty of verification or detection.<note place='foot'>1 Stark. Evid. 487. The Gospels abound in instances of this. See, for example,
Mark, xv. 21. John, xviii. 10. Luke, xxiii. 6. Matt. xxvii. 58-60, John xi. 1.</note>
It is easier, therefore, to make out the proof of any fact,
if proof it may be called, by suborning one or more false witnesses,
to testify directly to the matter in question, than to
procure an equal number to testify falsely to such collateral and
separate circumstances as will, without greater danger of detection,
lead to the same false result. The increased number of
witnesses to circumstances, and the increased number of the
circumstances themselves, all tend to increase the probability of
detection if the witnesses are false, because thereby the points
are multiplied in which their statements may be compared with
each other, as well as with the truth itself, and in the same proportion
is increased the danger of variance and inconsistency.<note place='foot'>1 Stark. Evid. 522, 585.</note>
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
Thus the force of circumstantial evidence is found to depend on
the number of particulars involved in the narrative; the difficulty
of fabricating them all, if false, and the great facility of detection;
the nature of the circumstances to be compared, and
from which the dates and other facts are to be collected; the
intricacy of the comparison; the number of the intermediate
steps in the process of deduction; and the circuity of the investigation.
The more largely the narrative partakes of these
characters, the further it will be found removed from all suspicion
of contrivance or design, and the more profoundly the
mind will repose on the conviction of its truth.
</p>

<p>
§ 41. The narratives of the sacred writers, both Jewish and
Christian, abound in examples of this kind of evidence, the
value of which is hardly capable of being properly estimated.
It does not, as has been already remarked, amount to mathematical
demonstration; nor is this degree of proof justly demandable
in any question of moral conduct. In all human
transactions, the highest degree of assurance to which we can
arrive, short of the evidence of our own senses, is that of
probability. The most that can be asserted is, that the narrative
is more likely to be true than false; and it may be in the
highest degree more likely, but still be short of absolute mathematical
certainty. Yet this very probability may be so great as
to satisfy the mind of the most cautious, and enforce the assent
of the most reluctant and unbelieving. If it is such as usually
satisfies reasonable men, in matters of ordinary transaction, it is
all which the greatest sceptic has a right to require; for it is by
such evidence alone that our rights are determined, in the civil
tribunals; and on no other evidence do they proceed, even in
capital cases. Thus, where a house had been feloniously broken
open with a knife, the blade of which was broken and left in the
window, and the mutilated knife itself, the parts perfectly agreeing,
was found in the pocket of the accused, who gave no satisfactory
explanation of the fact, no reasonable doubt remained
of his participation in the crime. And where a murder had been
committed by shooting with a pistol, and the prisoner was connected
with the transaction by proof that the wadding of the
pistol was part of a letter addressed to him, the remainder of
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
which was found upon his person, no juror's conscience could
have reproached him for assenting to the verdict of condemnation.<note place='foot'>See 1 Stark. Evid. 498. Wills on Circumstantial Evidence, pp. 128, 129.</note>
Yet the evidence, in both cases, is but the evidence of
circumstances; amounting, it is true, to the highest degree of
probability, but yet not utterly inconsistent with the innocence
of the accused. The evidence which we have of the great facts
of the Bible history belongs to this class, that is, it is moral
evidence; sufficient to satisfy any rational mind, by carrying it
to the highest degree of moral certainty. If such evidence will
justify the taking away of human life or liberty, in the one case,
surely it ought to be deemed sufficient to determine our faith in
the other.
</p>

<p>
§ 42. All that Christianity asks of men on this subject, is,
that they would be consistent with themselves; that they would
treat its evidences as they treat the evidence of other things;
and that they would try and judge its actors and witnesses, as
they deal with their fellow-men, when testifying to human
affairs and actions, in human tribunals. Let the witnesses be
compared with themselves, with each other, and with surrounding
facts and circumstances; and let their testimony be sifted,
as if it were given in a court of justice, on the side of the adverse
party, the witnesses being subjected to a rigorous cross-examination.
The result, it is confidently believed, will be an
undoubting conviction of their integrity, ability, and truth. In
the course of such an examination, the undesigned coincidences
will multiply upon us at every step in our progress; the probability
of the veracity of the witnesses and of the reality of the
occurrences which they relate will increase, until it acquires, for
all practical purposes, the value and force of demonstration.
</p>

<p>
§ 43. It should be remembered, that very little of the literature
of their times and country has come down to us; and that
the collateral sources and means of corroborating and explaining
their writings are proportionally limited. The contemporary
writings and works of art which have reached us, have invariably
been found to confirm their accounts, to reconcile what was
apparently contradictory, and supply what seemed defective or
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
imperfect. We ought therefore to conclude, that if we had
more of the same light, all other similar difficulties and imperfections
would vanish. Indeed they have been gradually
vanishing, and rapidly too, before the light of modern research,
conducted by men of science in our own times. And it is
worthy of remark, that of all the investigations and discoveries
of travellers and men of letters, since the overthrow of the
Roman empire, not a vestige of antiquity has been found,
impeaching, in the slightest degree, the credibility of the
sacred writers; but, on the contrary, every result has tended to
confirm it.
</p>

<p>
§ 44. The essential marks of difference between true narratives
of facts and the creations of fiction, have already been adverted
to. It may here be added that these attributes of truth are
strikingly apparent throughout the gospel histories, and that
the absence of all the others is equally remarkable. The writers
allude, for example, to the existing manners and customs, and
to the circumstances of the times and of their country, with the
utmost minuteness of reference. And these references are
never formally made, nor with preface and explanation, never
multiplied and heaped on each other, nor brought together, as
though introduced by design; but they are scattered broad-cast
and singly over every part of the story, and so connect themselves
with every incident related, as to render the detection of
falsehood inevitable. This minuteness, too, is not peculiar to
any one of the historians, but is common to them all. Though
they wrote at different periods, and without mutual concert,
they all alike refer incidentally to the same state of affairs, and
to the same contemporary and collateral circumstances. Their
testimony, in this view, stands on the same ground with that of
four witnesses, separately examined before different commissioners,
upon the same interrogatories, and all adverting
incidentally to the same circumstances as surrounding and
accompanying the principal transaction, to which alone their
attention is directed. And it is worthy of observation that
these circumstances were at that time of a peculiar character.
Hardly a state or kingdom in the world ever experienced so
many vicissitudes in its government and political relations, as
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
did Judea, during the period of the gospel history. It was
successively under the government of Herod the Great, of
Archelaus, and of a Roman magistrate; it was a kingdom, a
tetrarchate, and a province; and its affairs, its laws, and the
administration of justice, were all involved in the confusion and
uncertainty naturally to be expected from recent conquest. It
would be difficult to select any place or period in the history of
nations, for the time and scene of a fictitious history or an imposture,
which would combine so many difficulties for the
fabricator to surmount, so many contemporary writers to confront
him with, and so many facilities for the detection of
falsehood.<note place='foot'>See Chalmers's Evidence, chap. iii.</note>
</p>

<p>
§ 45. <q>Had the evangelists been false historians,</q> says Dr.
Chalmers, <q>they would not have committed themselves upon
so many particulars. They would not have furnished the
vigilant inquirers of that period with such an effectual instrument
for bringing them into discredit with the people; nor
foolishly supplied, in every page of their narrative, so many
materials for a cross-examination, which would infallibly have
disgraced them. Now, we of this age can institute the same
cross-examination. We can compare the evangelical writers
with contemporary authors, and verify a number of circumstances
in the history, and government, and peculiar economy of
the Jewish people. We therefore have it in our power to institute
a cross-examination upon the writers of the New Testament;
and the freedom and frequency of their allusions to
these circumstances supply us with ample materials for it.
The fact, that they are borne out in their minute and incidental
allusions by the testimony of other historians, gives a strong
weight of what has been called circumstantial evidence in
their favour. As a specimen of the argument, let us confine
our observations to the history of our Saviour's trial, and execution,
and burial. They brought him to Pontius Pilate. We
know both from Tacitus and Josephus, that he was at that
time governor of Judea. A sentence from him was necessary
before they could proceed to the execution of Jesus; and we
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
know that the power of life and death was usually vested in
the Roman governor. Our Saviour was treated with derision;
and this we know to have been a customary practice at that
time, previous to the execution of criminals, and during the
time of it. Pilate scourged Jesus before he gave him up to be
crucified. We know from ancient authors, that this was a very
usual practice among the Romans. The accounts of an execution
generally run in this form: he was stripped, whipped, and
beheaded or executed. According to the evangelists, his accusation
was written on the top of the cross; and we learn from
Suetonius and others, that the crime of the person to be executed
was affixed to the instrument of his punishment. According
to the evangelists, this accusation was written in three
different languages; and we know from Josephus that it was
quite common in Jerusalem to have all public advertisements
written in this manner. According to the evangelists, Jesus
had to bear his cross; and we know from other sources of information,
that this was the constant practice of these times.
According to the evangelists, the body of Jesus was given up
to be buried at the request of friends. We know that, unless the
criminal was infamous, this was the law or the custom with all
Roman governors.</q><note place='foot'>See Chalmers's Evidence, pp. 76-78, Amer. ed. Proofs of this kind are
copiously referred to by Mr. Horne, in his Introduction, &amp;c. vol. i., ch. 3, sect. II. 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
§ 46. There is also a striking naturalness in the characters
exhibited in the sacred historians, rarely if ever found in works
of fiction, and probably nowhere else to be collected in a similar
manner from fragmentary and incidental allusions and expressions,
in the writings of different persons. Take, for example,
that of Peter, as it may be gathered from the evangelists,
and it will be hardly possible to conceive that four persons,
writing at different times, could have concurred in the delineation
of such a character, if it were not real; a character too,
we must observe, which is nowhere expressly drawn, but is
shown only here and there, casually, in the subordinate parts
of the main narrative. Thus disclosed, it is that of a confident,
sanguine, and zealous man; sudden and impulsive, yet
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
humble and ready to retract; honest and direct in his purposes;
ardently loving his master, yet deficient in fortitude and firmness
in his cause.<note place='foot'>See Mark viii. 32; ix. 5; and xiv. 29; Matt. xvi. 22; and xvii. 5; Luke ix.
33; and xviii. 18; John xiii, 8; and xviii. 15.</note> When Jesus put any question to the apostles,
it was Peter who was foremost to reply;<note place='foot'>Mark viii. 29; Matt. xvi. 16; Luke ix. 20.</note> and if they
would inquire of Jesus, it was Peter who was readiest to
speak.<note place='foot'>Matt. xviii. 21; and xix. 27; John xiii. 36.</note> He had the impetuous courage to cut off the ear of the
High Priest's servant, who came to arrest his master; and the
weakness to dissemble before the Jews, in the matter of eating
with Gentile converts.<note place='foot'>Gal. ii. 11.</note> It was he who ran with John to the
sepulchre, on the first intelligence of the resurrection of Jesus,
and with characteristic zeal rushed in, while John paused
without the door.<note place='foot'>John xx. 3-6.</note> He had the ardour to desire and the faith
to attempt to walk on the water, at the command of his Lord,
but as soon as he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid.<note place='foot'>Matt. xiv. 30.</note> He
was the first to propose the election of another apostle in the
place of Judas;<note place='foot'>Acts i. 15.</note> and he it was who courageously defended them
all, on the day of Pentecost, when the multitude charged them
with being filled with new wine.<note place='foot'>Acts ii. 14.</note> He was forward to acknowledge
Jesus to be the Messiah;<note place='foot'>Matt. xvi. 16; Mark viii. 29; Luke ix. 20; John vi. 69.</note> yet having afterwards endangered
his own life by wounding the servant of the High
Priest, he suddenly consulted his own safety by denying the
same Master, for whom, but a few hours before, he had declared
himself ready to die.<note place='foot'>Matt. xxvi. 33, 35; Mark xiv. 29.</note> We may safely affirm that the
annals of fiction afford no example of a similar but not uncommon
character, thus incidentally delineated.
</p>

<p>
§ 47. There are other internal marks of truth in the narratives
of the evangelists, which, however, need here be only
alluded to, as they have been treated with great fulness and
force by able writers, whose works are familiar to all.<note place='foot'>See Paley's view of the Evidences of Christianity, part ii. chapters iii. iv. v. vi.
vii; Ibid. part iii. ch. i.; Chalmers on the Evidence and Authority of the Christian
Revelation, ch. iii. iv. viii.; Wilson's Evidences of Christianity, lect. vi.; Bogue's
Essay on the Divine Authority of the New Testament, chap. iii. iv.</note> Among
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
these may be mentioned the nakedness of the narratives; the
absence of all parade by the writers about their own integrity,
of all anxiety to be believed, or to impress others with a good
opinion of themselves or their cause, of all marks of wonder, or
of desire to excite astonishment at the greatness of the events
they record, and of all appearance of design to exalt their
Master. On the contrary, there is apparently the most perfect
indifference on their part, whether they are believed or not;
or rather, the evident consciousness that they were recording
events well known to all, in their own country and times, and
undoubtedly to be believed, like any other matter of public
history, by readers in all other countries and ages. It is worthy,
too, of especial observation, that though the evangelists record
the unparalleled sufferings and cruel death of their beloved
Lord, and this too, by the hands and with the consenting voices
of those on whom he had conferred the greatest benefits, and
their own persecutions and dangers, yet they have bestowed no
epithets of harshness or even of just censure on the authors of
all this wickedness, but have everywhere left the plain and unincumbered
narrative to speak for itself, and the reader to
pronounce his own sentence of condemnation; like true witnesses,
who have nothing to gain or to lose by the event of the
cause, they state the facts, and leave them to their fate. Their
simplicity and artlessness, also, should not pass unnoticed, in
readily stating even those things most disparaging to themselves.
Their want of faith in their Master, their dulness of apprehension
of his teachings, their strifes for preëminence, their inclination
to call fire from heaven upon their enemies, their desertion of
their Lord in his hour of extreme peril; these, and many other
incidents tending directly to their own dishonour, are nevertheless
set down with all the directness and sincerity of truth, as
by men writing under the deepest sense of responsibility to
God. Some of the more prominent instances of this class of
proofs will be noticed hereafter, in their proper places, in the
narratives themselves.
</p>

<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>

<p>
§ 48. Lastly, the great character they have portrayed is perfect.
It is the character of a sinless Being; of one supremely
wise and supremely good. It exhibits no error, no sinister
intention, no imprudence, no ignorance, no evil passion, no
impatience; in a word, no fault; but all is perfect uprightness,
innocence, wisdom, goodness and truth. The mind of man has
never conceived the idea of such a character, even for his gods;
nor has history nor poetry shadowed it forth. The doctrines
and precepts of Jesus are in strict accordance with the attributes
of God, agreeably to the most exalted idea which we can form of
them, either from reason or from revelation. They are strikingly
adapted to the capacity of mankind, and yet are delivered with
a simplicity and majesty wholly divine. He spake as never man
spake. He spake with authority; yet addressed himself to the
reason and the understanding of men; and he spake with wisdom,
which men could neither gainsay nor resist. In his private life,
he exhibits a character not merely of strict justice, but of overflowing
benignity. He is temperate, without austerity; his
meekness and humility are signal; his patience is invincible;
truth and sincerity illustrate his whole conduct; every one of
his virtues is regulated by consummate prudence; and he both
wins the love of his friends, and extorts the wonder and admiration
of his enemies<note place='foot'>See Bogue's Essay, chap. i. sect. 2; Newcome's Obs. part ii. ch. i. sec. 14.</note>. He is represented in every variety of
situation in life, from the height of worldly grandeur, amid the
acclamations of an admiring multitude, to the deepest abyss of
human degradation and woe, apparently deserted of God and
man. Yet everywhere he is the same; displaying a character
of unearthly perfection, symmetrical in all its proportions, and
encircled with splendour more than human. Either the men of
Galilee were men of superlative wisdom, of extensive knowledge
and experience, and of deeper skill in the arts of deception,
than any and all others, before or after them, or they have truly
stated the astonishing things which they saw and heard.
</p>

<p>
The narratives of the evangelists are now submitted to the
reader's perusal and examination, upon the principles and by
the rules already stated. For this purpose, and for the sake of
more ready and close comparison, they are arranged in juxtaposition,
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
after the general order of the latest and most approved
harmonies. The question is not upon the strict propriety of
the arrangement, but upon the veracity of the witnesses and
the credibility of their narratives. With the relative merits of
modern harmonists, and with points of controversy among
theologians, the writer has no concern. His business is that of
a lawyer, examining the testimony of witnesses by the rules of
his own profession, in order to ascertain whether, if they had
thus testified on oath, in a court of justice, they would be
entitled to credit; and whether their narratives, as we now have
them, would be received as ancient documents, coming from
the proper custody. If so, then it is believed that every honest
and impartial man will act consistently with that result, by
receiving their testimony in all the extent of its import. To
write out a full commentary or argument upon the text, would
be a useless addition to the bulk of the volume; but a few notes
have been added for illustration of the narratives, and for the
clearing up of apparent discrepancies, as being all that members
of the legal profession would desire.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Harmony Of The Gospels.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part I. Events Connected With The Birth And Childhood Of Jesus.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Time.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>About thirteen and a half years.</hi>
</p>

<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>

<div>
<head>§ 1. Preface to Luke's Gospel.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. I. 1-4.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Forasmuch as many have taken in
hand to set forth in order a declaration
of those things which are most
surely believed among us,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 Even as they delivered them unto
us, which from the beginning were
eye-witnesses, and ministers of the
word;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 It seemed good to me also, having
had perfect understanding of all
things from the very first, to write
unto thee in order, most excellent
Theophilus,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 That thou mightest know the
certainty of those things wherein thou
hast been instructed.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 2. An Angel appears to Zacharias. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. I. 5-25.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 There was in the days of Herod
the king of Judea, a certain priest
named Zacharias, of the course of
Abia: and his wife <hi rend='italic'>was</hi> of the daughters
of Aaron, and her name <hi rend='italic'>was</hi>
Elisabeth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And they were both righteous
before God, walking in all the commandments
and ordinances of the Lord
blameless.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 and they had no child, because
that Elisabeth was barren; and they
both were <hi rend='italic'>now</hi> well stricken in years.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And it came to pass, that, while
he executed the priest's office before
God in the order of his course,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 According to the custom of the
priest's office, his lot was to burn incense
when he went into the temple
of the Lord.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And the whole multitude of the
people were praying without, at the
time of incense.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And there appeared unto him an
angel of the Lord, standing on the
right side of the altar of incense.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And when Zacharias saw <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>,
he was troubled, and fear fell upon
him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 But the angel said unto him,
Fear not, Zacharias: for thy prayer is
heard; and thy wife Elisabeth shall
bear thee a son, and thou shalt call
his name John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And thou shalt have joy and
gladness, and many shall rejoice at his
birth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 For he shall be great in the sight
of the Lord, and shall drink neither
wine nor strong drink; and he shall be
filled with the Holy Ghost, even from
his mother's womb.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And many of the children of
Israel shall he turn to the Lord their
God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And he shall go before him in the
spirit and power of Elias,<note place='foot'>Mal. iv. 5, 6.</note> to turn the
hearts of the fathers to the children,
and the disobedient to the wisdom of
the just; to make ready a people prepared
for the Lord.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 And Zacharias said unto the
angel, Whereby shall I know this?
for I am an old man, and my wife
well stricken in years.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And the angel, answering, said
unto him, I am Gabriel, that stand in
the presence of God, and am sent to
speak unto thee, and to shew thee
these glad tidings.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And behold, thou shalt be dumb,
and not able to speak, until the day
that these things shall be performed,
because thou believest not my words,
which shall be fulfilled in their season.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And the people waited for Zacharias,
and marvelled that he tarried so
long in the temple.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And when he came out, he could
not speak unto them: and they perceived
that he had seen a vision in the
temple; for he beckoned unto them,
and remained speechless.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And it came to pass, that as
soon as the days of his ministration
were accomplished, he departed to his
own house.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 And after those days his wife
Elisabeth conceived, and hid herself
five months, saying,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 Thus hath the Lord dealt with
me in the days wherein he looked on
<hi rend='italic'>me</hi>, to take away my reproach among
men.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>

<div>
<head>§ 3. An Angel appears to Mary. <hi rend='italic'>Nazareth</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. I. 26-38.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And in the sixth month the angel
Gabriel was sent from God unto a city
of Galilee, named Nazareth,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 To a virgin espoused to a man
whose name was Joseph, of the house
of David; and the virgin's name <hi rend='italic'>was</hi>
Mary.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 And the angel came in unto her,
and said, Hail, <hi rend='italic'>thou that art</hi> highly
favoured, the Lord is with thee: blessed
art thou among women.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And when she saw <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, she
was troubled at his saying, and cast
in her mind what manner of salutation
this should be.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And the angel said unto her,
Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found
favour with God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 And behold, thou shalt conceive
in thy womb, and bring forth a son,
and shalt call his name JESUS.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 He shall be great, and shall be
called the son of the Highest; and the
Lord God shall give unto him the
throne of his father David.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 And<note place='foot'>Mic. iv. 7.</note> he shall reign over the
house of Jacob for ever; and of his
kingdom there shall be no end.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 Then said Mary unto the angel,
How shall this be, seeing I know not
a man?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 And the angel answered and said
unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come
upon thee, and the power of the Highest
shall overshadow thee: therefore also
that holy thing which shall be born of
thee, shall be called the Son of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 And behold, thy cousin Elisabeth,
she hath also conceived a son in
her old age; and this is the sixth month
with her who was called barren:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 For with God nothing shall be
impossible.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 And Mary said, Behold the
handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me
according to thy word. And the angel
departed from her.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 4. Mary visits Elisabeth. <hi rend='italic'>Juttah</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. I. 39-56.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 And Mary arose in those days,
and went into the hill-country with
haste, into a city of Juda,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 And entered into the house of
Zacharias, and saluted Elisabeth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 And it came to pass, that when
Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary,
the babe leaped in her womb: and
Elisabeth was filled with the Holy
Ghost.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 And she spake out with a loud
voice and said, Blessed <hi rend='italic'>art</hi> thou among
women, and blessed <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> the fruit of thy
womb.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 And whence <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> this to me, that
the mother of my lord should come to
me?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 For lo, as soon as the voice of
thy salutation sounded in mine ears,
the babe leaped in my womb for joy.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 And blessed <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> she that believed:
for there shall be a performance of those
things which were told her from the
Lord.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46 And Mary said, My soul doth
magnify the Lord,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>47 And my spirit hath rejoiced in
God my Saviour.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>48 For he hath regarded the low
estate of his handmaiden: for behold,
from henceforth all generations shall
call me blessed.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>49 For he that is mighty hath done
to me great things; and holy <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> his
name.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>50 And his mercy <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> on them that
fear him, from generation to generation.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>51 He hath shewed strength with
his arm; he hath scattered the proud
in the imagination of their hearts.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>52 He hath put down the mighty
from <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> seats, and exalted them of
low degree.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>53 He hath filled the hungry with
good things, and the rich he hath sent
empty away.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>54 He hath holpen his servant Israel,
in remembrance of <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> mercy;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>55 As<note place='foot'>Is. xli. 8, 9; Gen. xxii. 16, seq.</note> he spake to our fathers, to
Abraham, and to his seed, for ever.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>56 And Mary abode with her about
three months, and returned to her own
house.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>

<div>
<head>§ 5. The birth of John the Baptist. <hi rend='italic'>Juttah</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. I. 57-80.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>57 Now Elisabeth's full time came
that she should be delivered; and she
brought forth a son.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>58 And her neighbours and her
cousins heard how the Lord had
shewed great mercy upon her; and
they rejoiced with her.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>59 And it came to pass, that on
the eighth day they came to circumcise
the child; and they called
him Zacharias, after the name of his
father.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>60 And his mother answered and
said, not <hi rend='italic'>so</hi>; but he shall be called
John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>61 And they said unto her, There
is none of thy kindred that is called
by this name.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>62 And they made signs to his
father, how he would have him
called.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>63 And he asked for a writing-table,
and wrote, saying, His name is
John. And they marvelled all.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>64 And his mouth was opened immediately,
and his tongue loosed, and
he spake, and praised God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>65 And fear came on all that dwelt
round about them: and all these sayings
were noised abroad throughout
all the hill-country of Judea.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>66 And all they that heard <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>,
laid <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> up in their hearts, saying,
What manner of child shall this be!
And the hand of the Lord was with
him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>67 And his father Zacharias was
filled with the Holy Ghost, and prophesied,
saying,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>68 Blessed <hi rend='italic'>be</hi> the Lord God of Israel;
for he hath visited and redeemed
his people,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>69 And hath raised up a horn of
salvation for us, in the house of his
servant David:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>70 As he spake by the mouth of
his holy prophets, which have been
since the world began:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>71 That we should be saved from
our enemies, and from the hand of all
that hate us;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>72 To perform the mercy <hi rend='italic'>promised</hi>
to our fathers, and to remember his
holy covenant;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>73 The oath which he sware to our
Father Abraham,<note place='foot'>Gen. xxii. 16, seq.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>74 That he would grant unto us,
that we, being delivered out of the
hand of our enemies, might serve him
without fear,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>75 In holiness and righteousness
before him, all the days of our life.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>76 And thou, child, shalt be called
the Prophet of the Highest, for thou
shalt go before the face of the Lord to
prepare his ways;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>77 To give knowledge of salvation
unto his people, by the remission of
their sins,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>78 Through the tender mercy of our
God; whereby the day-spring from on
high hath visited us,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>79 To give light to them that sit in
darkness and <hi rend='italic'>in</hi> the shadow of death,
to guide our feet into the way of peace.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>80 And the child grew, and waxed
strong in spirit, and was in the deserts
till the day of his shewing unto Israel.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>

<div>
<head>§ 6. An Angel appears to Joseph. <hi rend='italic'>Nazareth.</hi></head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. I. 18-25.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 Now the birth of Jesus Christ
was on this wise: When as his mother
Mary was espoused to Joseph,
before they came together, she was
found with child of the holy Ghost.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 Then Joseph her husband, being
a just <hi rend='italic'>man</hi>, and not willing to make
her a public example, was minded to
put her away privily.<note place='foot'><p>Matt. i. 19.</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>husband</hi>. There was commonly an interval of ten or twelve months, between
the making of the contract of marriage and the time of its celebration. <hi rend='italic'>Gen</hi>. xxiv. 55;
<hi rend='italic'>Judg</hi>. xiv. 8. During this period, though there was no intercourse between the bride and
bridegroom, not even so much as an interchange of conversation, yet they were considered
and spoken of as husband and wife. If, at the end of this probationary period, the
bridegroom was unwilling to solemnize his engagements by the marriage of the bride, he was
bound to give her a bill of divorce, as if she had been his wife. And if she, during the
same period, had illicit intercourse with another man, she was liable to punishment, as an
adulteress. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jahn's</hi> Archæol. § 154.
</p></note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 But while he thought on these
things, Behold, the angel of the Lord
appeared unto him in a dream, saying,
Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to
take unto thee Mary thy wife; for that
which is conceived in her is of the
Holy Ghost.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And she shall bring forth a son,
and thou shalt call his name JESUS:
for he shall save his people from their
sins.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 Now all this was done, that it
might be fulfilled which was spoken
of the Lord by the prophet, saying,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 Behold,<note place='foot'>Is. vii. 14.</note>
a virgin shall be with
child, and shall bring forth a son, and
they shall call his name Emmanuel,
which being interpreted is, God with
us.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 Then Joseph, being raised from
sleep, did as the angel of the Lord had
bidden him, and took unto him his wife:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And knew her not till she had
brought forth her first-born son: and
he called his name JESUS.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>

<div>
<head>§ 7. The birth of Jesus. <hi rend='italic'>Bethlehem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. II. 1-7.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>And it came to pass in those days,
that there went out a decree<note place='foot'>Luke ii. 1. <hi rend='italic'>a decree</hi>. This decree was issued eleven years before it was carried into
effect, the delay having been procured by Herod. This fact reconciles the evangelist with
the Roman historians, from whom it appears that Cyrenius was not governor when the
decree was issued, though he held that office when the census was taken and the tax
assessed. See <hi rend='smallcaps'>Townsend</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>in loc.</hi></note> from
Cesar Augustus, that all the world
should be taxed.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 (And this taxing was first made
when Cyrenius was governor of Syria.)</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And all went to be taxed, every
one into his own city.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And Joseph also went up from
Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth,
into Judea, unto the city of David,
which is called Bethlehem, (because
he was of the house and lineage of
David,)</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 To be taxed with Mary his
espoused wife, being great with child.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And so it was, that while they
were there, the days were accomplished
that she should be delivered.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And she brought forth her first-born
son, and wrapped him in swaddling-clothes,
and laid him in a manger;
because there was no room for
them in the inn.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 8. An Angel appears to the Shepherds. <hi rend='italic'>Near Bethlehem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. II. 8-20.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And there were in the same country
shepherds abiding in the field, keeping
watch over their flock by night.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And lo, the angel of the Lord
came upon them, and the glory of the
Lord shone round about them; and
they were sore afraid.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And the angel said unto them,
Fear not: for behold, I bring you good
tidings of great joy, which shall be to
all people.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 For unto you is born this day,
in the city of David, a Saviour, which
is Christ the Lord.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And this <hi rend='italic'>shall be</hi> a sign unto you;
Ye shall find the babe wrapped in
swaddling-clothes, lying in a manger.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And suddenly there was with the
angel a multitude of the heavenly host
praising God, and saying,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 Glory to God in the highest, and
on earth peace, good will toward men.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And it came to pass, as the angels
were gone away from them into
heaven, the shepherds said one to
another, Let us now go even unto
Bethlehem, and see this thing which
is come to pass, which the Lord hath
made known unto us.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And they came with haste, and
found Mary and Joseph, and the babe
lying in a manger.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And when they had seen <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, they
made known abroad the saying which
was told them concerning this child.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 And all they that heard it, wondered
at those things which were told
them by the shepherds.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 But Mary kept all these things,
and pondered <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> in her heart.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And the shepherds returned, glorifying
and praising God for all the
things that they had heard and seen,
as it was told unto them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>

<div>
<head>§ 9. The circumcision of Jesus and his presentation in the temple. <hi rend='italic'>Bethlehem</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. II. 21-38.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And when eight days were accomplished
for the circumcising of the
child,<note place='foot'>Gen. xvii. 12; Lev. xii. 3.</note> his name was called JESUS,
which was so named of the angel before
he was conceived in the womb.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And when the days of her purification
according to the law of Moses
were accomplished, they brought him
to Jerusalem, to present <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> to the
Lord;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 (As it is written in the law of the
Lord,<note place='foot'>Ex. xiii. 2; Numb. viii. 16, 17.</note> Every male that openeth the
womb shall be called holy to the Lord;)</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 And to offer a sacrifice according
to that which is said in the law of the
Lord,<note place='foot'>Lev. xii. 6, 8.</note> A pair of turtle-doves, or two
young pigeons.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And behold, there was a man in
Jerusalem, whose name <hi rend='italic'>was</hi> Simeon;
and the same man <hi rend='italic'>was</hi> just and devout,
waiting for the consolation of Israel:
and the Holy Ghost was upon him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And it was revealed unto him
by the Holy Ghost, that he should not
see death, before he had seen the
Lord's Christ.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And he came by the Spirit into
the temple; and when the parents
brought in the child Jesus, to do for
him after the custom of the law,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 Then took he him up in his
arms, and blessed God, and said,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 Lord, now lettest thou thy servant
depart in peace, according to thy
word:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 For mine eyes have seen thy salvation,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 Which thou hast prepared before
the face of all people;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 A light to lighten the Gentiles,
and the glory of thy people Israel.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 And Joseph and his mother marvelled
at those things which were
spoken of him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 And Simeon blessed them, and
said unto Mary his mother, Behold,
this child is<note place='foot'>Is. viii. 14.</note> set for the fall and rising
again of many in Israel; and for a
sign which shall be spoken against,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 (Yea, a sword shall pierce through
thy own soul also;) that the thoughts
of many hearts may be revealed.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 And there was one Anna, a prophetess,
the daughter of Phanuel, of
the tribe of Aser: she was of a great
age, and had lived with a husband
seven years from her virginity.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 And she <hi rend='italic'>was</hi> a widow of about
fourscore and four years, which departed
not from the temple, but served
<hi rend='italic'>God</hi> with fastings and prayers night
and day.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 And she coming in that instant,
gave thanks likewise unto the Lord,
and spake of him to all them that
looked for redemption in Jerusalem.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>

<div>
<head>§ 10. The Magi. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Bethlehem.</hi></head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. II. 1-12.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem
of Judea in the days of Herod
the king, behold, there came wise men
from the East to Jerusalem,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 Saying, Where is he that is born
king of the Jews? for we have seen
his star in the east, and are come to
worship him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 When Herod the king had heard
<hi rend='italic'>these things</hi>, he was troubled,<note place='foot'>Matth.
ii. 3, <hi rend='italic'>he was troubled</hi>. According to Josephus, Herod was always in fear for
the stability of his throne, and anxious to pry into futurity to discover whether it was
likely to endure. Thus, when advanced to regal power, he sent for Manahem, an Essene,
who had predicted of him when a boy that he would be a king, to inquire of him how
long he should reign. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Joseph.</hi> Ant. xv. § 5. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Blunt</hi>, Veracity, &amp;c. § ii. 2.</note> and all
Jerusalem with him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And when he had gathered all the
chief priests and scribes of the people
together, he demanded of them
where Christ should be born.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And they said unto him, in Bethlehem
of Judea: for thus it is written
by the prophet,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And<note place='foot'>Mic. v. 2.</note>
thou Bethlehem, in the land
of Juda, art not the least among the
princes of Juda: for out of thee shall
come a Governor, that shall rule my
people Israel.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 Then Herod, when he had privily
called the wise men, inquired
of them diligently what time the star
appeared.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And he sent them to Bethlehem,
and said Go, and search diligently for
the young child; and when ye have
found <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, bring me word again, that
I may come and worship him also.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 When they had heard the king,
they departed; and lo, the star, which
they saw in the east, went before them,
till it came and stood over where the
young child was.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 When they saw the star, they
rejoiced with exceeding great joy.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And when they were come
into the house, they saw the young
child with Mary his mother, and fell
down, and worshipped him: and when
they had opened their treasures,
they presented unto him gifts;
gold, and frankincense, and myrrh.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And being warned of God in a
dream that they should not return
to Herod, they departed into their
own country another way.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>

<div>
<head>§ 11. The flight into Egypt. Herod's cruelty. The return. <hi rend='italic'>Bethlehem. Nazareth</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. II. 13-23.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And when they were departed,
behold, the angel of the Lord
appeareth to Joseph in a dream,
saying, Arise, and take the young
child and his mother, and flee into
Egypt, and be thou there until I
bring thee word: for Herod will
seek the young child to destroy
him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 When he arose, he took the
young child and his mother by
night, and departed into Egypt:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And was there until the death
of Herod: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord
by the prophet, saying,<note place='foot'>Hos. xi. 1.</note> Out of
Egypt have I called my Son.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 Then Herod, when he saw that he
was mocked of the wise men, was
exceeding wroth, and sent forth,
and slew all the children that were
in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts
thereof, from two years old and
under, according to the time which
he had diligently inquired of the
wise men.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 Then was fulfilled that which
was spoken by Jeremy the prophet,
saying,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 In<note place='foot'>Jer. xxxi. 15, and xl. 1.</note> Rama was there a voice
heard, lamentation, and weeping,
and great mourning, Rachel weeping
for her children, and would not be
comforted, because they are not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 But, when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord
appeareth in a dream to Joseph in
Egypt,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 Saying, Arise, and take the
young child and his mother, and go
into the land of Israel: for they
are dead which sought the young
child's life.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And he arose, and took the young
child and his mother, and came into
the land of Israel.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 But when he heard that Archelaus
did reign in Judea in the room of
his father Herod, he was afraid to
go thither:<note place='foot'>Matth. ii. 22,
<hi rend='italic'>he was afraid</hi>. The naked statement of this fact, without explanation,
is a mark of the sincerity of the evangelist, for the value of which we are indebted to
Josephus, who relates, (Ant. b. 17, ch. 9, § 3,) an instance of savage cruelty in Archelaus,
immediately on his coming to the throne, in causing three thousand persons to be
butchered in cold blood, at the first passover after Herod's death. Such an act, committed
under such circumstances, must have been rapidly made known abroad, and inspired all
persons with horror. Well, therefore, might Joseph fear to return. But Matthew's
incidental allusion to the cause, is characteristic of a man intent only upon the statement
of the main facts, and regardless of appearances or explanations.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Blunt</hi>, Veracity, &amp;c.
§ ii. 3.</note> notwithstanding, being
warned of God in a dream, he turned
aside into the parts of Galilee:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And he came and dwelt in a city
called Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by the prophets,
He shall be called a Nazarene.<note place='foot'>Is. xi. 1, and liii. 2; Zech. vi. 12; Rev. v. 5.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>

<div>
<head>§ 12. At twelve years of age, Jesus goes to the Passover. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. II. 41-52.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 Now his parents went to Jerusalem
every year at the feast of the
passover.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 And when he was twelve years
old<note place='foot'>Luke ii. 42; <hi rend='italic'>twelve years old</hi>.
Jewish children were not obliged to the observances
of the ceremonial law, until they attained to years of discretion, which, in males, was
fixed by common consent at twelve years. On arriving at this age, they were taken to
Jerusalem at the passover, of which they thenceforth participated, as <q>sons of commandment,</q>
being fully initiated into the doctrines and ceremonies of the Jewish church,
probably after examination by the doctors. This accounts for the circumstance of his
being found among them, both hearing, and asking them questions. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Stackhouse</hi>, Hist.
N. T. ch. i.; <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bloomfield</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>in loc</hi>.</note>,
they went up to Jerusalem after
the custom of the feast.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 And when they had fulfilled the
days, as they returned, the child Jesus
tarried behind in Jerusalem; and
Joseph and his mother knew not of it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 But they, supposing him to have
been in the company,<note place='foot'>Luke ii. 44;
<hi rend='italic'>in the company</hi>. All who came, not only from the same city, but from
the same canton or district, made one company. They carried necessaries along with
them, and tents for their lodging at night. Such companies they now call <hi rend='italic'>caravans</hi>,
and in several places have houses fitted up for their reception, called <hi rend='italic'>caravanseries</hi>.
This account of their manner of travelling furnishes a ready answer to the question,
How could Joseph and Mary make a day's journey, without discovering, before night,
that Jesus was not in the company? In the day-time, we may reasonably presume,
the travellers would mingle with different parties of their friends and acquaintance; but
in the evening, when they were about to encamp, every one would join the family to
which he belonged. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Campbell</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>in loc</hi>.</note> went a day's
journey; and they sought him among
their kinsfolk and acquaintance.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 And when they found him not,
they turned back again to Jerusalem,
seeking him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46 And it came to pass, that after
three days they found him in the temple,
sitting in the midst of the doctors,
both hearing them, and asking them
questions.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>47 And all that heard him were
astonished at his understanding and
answers.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>48 And when they saw him, they
were amazed: and his mother said
unto him, Son, why hast thou thus
dealt with us? Behold, thy father
and I have sought thee sorrowing.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>49 And he said unto them, How is
it that ye sought me? wist ye not that
I must be about my Father's business?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>50 And they understood not the
saying which he spake unto them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>51 And he went down with them,
and came to Nazareth, and was subject
unto them: but his mother kept all
these sayings in her heart.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>52 And Jesus increased in wisdom
and stature, and in favour with God
and man.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>

<div>
<head>§ 13. The Genealogies.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. I. 1-17.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>The book of the generation of Jesus
Christ, the son of David, the son of
Abraham.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac
begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Judas
and his brethren;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And Judas begat Phares and Zara
of Thamar; and Phares begat Esrom;
and Esrom begat Aram;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And Aram begat Aminadab; and
Aminadab begat Naasson; and Naasson
begat Salmon;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And Salmon begat Booz of Rachab;
and Booz begat Obed of Ruth;
and Obed begat Jesse;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And Jesse begat David the king;
and David the king begat Solomon of
her <hi rend='italic'>that had been the wife</hi> of Urias;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And Solomon begat Roboam; and
Roboam begat Abia; and Abia begat
Asa;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And Asa begat Josaphat; and
Josaphat begat Joram; and Joram
begat Ozias;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And Ozias begat Joatham; and
Joatham begat Achaz; and Achaz begat
Ezekias;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And Ezekias begat Manasses;
and Manasses begat Amon; and Amon
begat Josias;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And Josias begat Jechonias and
his brethren, about the time they were
carried away to Babylon;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And after they were brought to
Babylon, Jechonias begat Salathiel;
and Salathiel begat Zorobabel;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And Zorobabel begat Abiud;
and Abiud begat Eliakim; and Eliakim
begat Azor;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And Azor begat Sadoc; and Sadoc
begat Achim; and Achim begat
Eliud;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And Eliud begat Eleazar; and
Eleazar begat Matthan; and Matthan
begat Jacob;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And Jacob begat Joseph the
husband of Mary, of whom was born
Jesus, who is called Christ.</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>17 So all the generations from
Abraham to David <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> fourteen generations;
and from David until the
carrying away into Babylon <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> fourteen
generations; and from the carrying
away into Babylon unto Christ
<hi rend='italic'>are</hi> fourteen generations.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. III. 23-38, INVERTED.<note place='foot'><p>The Genealogy of Jesus, as given by Luke, is here inverted for the sake of
more convenient comparison with that given by Matthew.
</p>
<p>
The apparent discrepancies in these accounts are reconciled by Dr. Robinson, in the
following manner:
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>I. In the genealogy given by Matthew, considered by itself, some difficulties present
themselves.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>1. There is some diversity among commentators in making out the three divisions,
each of fourteen generations, v. 17. It is, however, obvious, that the first division begins
with Abraham and ends with David. But does the second begin with David, or with
Solomon? Assuredly with the former; because, just as the first begins <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>apo Abraham</foreign>,
so the second also is said to begin <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>apo David</foreign>. The first
extends <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>heos David</foreign>, and
includes him; the second extends to an epoch and not to a person; and therefore the
persons who are mentioned as coeval with this epoch are not reckoned before it. After
the epoch the enumeration begins again with Jechoniah, and ends with Jesus. In this
way the three divisions are made out thus:&mdash;</q>
</p>
<p>
1. Abraham.<lb/>
2. Isaac.<lb/>
3. Jacob.<lb/>
4. Judah.<lb/>
5. Phares.<lb/>
6. Esrom.<lb/>
7. Aram.<lb/>
8. Aminadab.<lb/>
9. Naasson.<lb/>
10. Salmon.<lb/>
11. Boaz.<lb/>
12. Obed.<lb/>
13. Jesse.<lb/>
14. David.
</p>
<p>
1. David.<lb/>
2. Solomon.<lb/>
3. Roboam.<lb/>
4. Abiah.<lb/>
5. Asa.<lb/>
6. Josaphat.<lb/>
7. Joram.<lb/>
8. Uzziah (Ozias).<lb/>
9. Jotham.<lb/>
10. Ahaz.<lb/>
11. Hezekiah.<lb/>
12. Manasseh.<lb/>
13. Amon.<lb/>
14. Josiah.
</p>
<p>
1. Jechoniah.<lb/>
2. Salathiel.<lb/>
3. Zorobabel.<lb/>
4. Abiud.<lb/>
5. Eliakim.<lb/>
6. Azor.<lb/>
7. Sadoc.<lb/>
8. Achim.<lb/>
9. Eliud.<lb/>
10. Eleazar.<lb/>
11. Matthan.<lb/>
12. Jacob.<lb/>
13. Joseph.<lb/>
14. Jesus.
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>2. Another difficulty arises from the fact, that between Joram and Ozias, in v. 8,
three names of Jewish kings are omitted, viz. Ahaziah, Joash, and Amaziah; see 2 K.
8, 25 and Chr. 22, 1. 2 K. 11, 2. 21 and 2 Chr. 22, 11. 2 K. 12, 21. 14, 1 and 2 Chr.
24, 27. Further, between Josiah and Jechoniah in v. 11, the name of Jehoiakim is also
omitted; 2 K. 23, 34. 2 Chr. 36, 4. comp. 1 Chr. 3, 15, 16. If these four names are to
be reckoned, then the second division, instead of fourteen generations, will contain
eighteen, in contradiction to v. 17. To avoid this difficulty, Newcome and some others
have regarded v. 17 as a mere gloss, <q>a marginal note taken into the text.</q> This indeed
is in itself possible; yet all the external testimony of manuscripts and versions is in
favour of the genuineness of that verse. It is better therefore to regard these names as
having been customarily omitted in the current genealogical tables, from which Matthew
copied. Such omissions of particular generations did sometimes actually occur, <q>propteres
quod malæ essent et impiæ,</q> according to R. Sal. Jarchi; Lightfoot, Hor. Heb. in Matth.
1, 8. A striking example of an omission of this kind, apparently without any such reason,
is found in Ezra 7, 1-5, compared with 1 Chr. 6, 3-15. This latter passage contains
the lineal descent of the high-priests from Aaron to the captivity; while Ezra, in the place
cited, in tracing back his own genealogy through the very same line of descent, omits at
least six generations. A similar omission is necessarily implied in the genealogy of David,
as given Ruth 4, 20-22. 1 Chr. 2, 10-12. Matth. 1, 5, 6. Salmon was contemporary
with the capture of Jericho by Joshua, and married Rahab. But from that time until
David, an interval of at least four hundred and fifty years (Acts 13, 20,) there intervened,
according to the list, only four generations, averaging of course more than one hundred
years to each. But the highest average in point of fact is <emph>three</emph> generations to a century;
and if reckoned by the eldest sons they are usually shorter, or three generations for every
seventy-five or eighty years. See Sir I. Newton's Chronol. p. 53. Lond. 1728.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>We may therefore rest in the necessary conclusion, that as our Lord's regular descent
from David was always asserted, and was never denied even by the Jews; so Matthew, in
tracing this admitted descent, appealed to genealogical tables, which were public and
acknowledged in the family and tribe from which Christ sprang. He could not indeed do
otherwise. How much stress was laid by the Jews upon lineage in general, and how much
care and attention were bestowed upon such tables, is well known. See Lightfoot, Hor.
Heb. in Matth. 1, 1. Comp. Phil. 3, 4, 5.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>II. Other questions of some difficulty present themselves, when we compare together
the two genealogies.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>1. Both tables at first view purport to give the lineage of our Lord through Joseph.
But Joseph cannot have been the son by natural descent of both Joseph and Heli (Eli),
Matth. 1, 16. Luke 3, 23. Only one of the tables therefore can give his true lineage by
generation. This is done apparently in that of Matthew; because, beginning at Abraham,
it proceeds by natural descent, as we know from history, until after the exile; and then
continues on in the same mode of expression until Joseph. Here the phrase is changed;
and it is no longer Joseph who 'begat' Jesus, but Joseph <q>the husband of Mary, of whom
was born Jesus who is called the Christ.</q> See Augustine, de Consensu Evangel. II. 5.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>2. To whom then does the genealogy in Luke chiefly relate? If in any way to
Joseph, as the language purports, then it must be because he in some way bore the legal
relation of son to Heli, either by adoption or by marriage. If the former simply, it is
difficult to comprehend why, along with his true personal lineage as traced by Matthew up
through the royal line of Jewish kings to David, there should be given also another
subordinate genealogy, not personally his own, and running back through a different and
inferior line to the same great ancestor. If, on the other hand, as is most probable, this
relation to Heli came by marriage with his daughter, so that Joseph was truly his <emph>son-in-law</emph>
(comp. Ruth 1, 8. 11. 12); then it follows, that the genealogy in Luke is in fact that
of Mary the mother of Jesus. This being so, we can perceive a sufficient reason why this
genealogy should be thus given, viz. in order to show definitely, that Jesus was in the
most full and perfect sense a descendant of David: not only by law in the royal line of
kings, through his reputed father, but also in fact by direct personal descent through his
mother.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>That Mary, like Joseph, was a descendant of David, is not indeed elsewhere expressly
said in the New Testament. Yet a very strong presumption to that effect is to be drawn
from the address of the angel in Luke 1, 32; as also from the language of Luke 2, 5,
where Joseph, as one of the posterity of David, is said to have gone up to Bethlehem, to
<hi rend='italic'>enroll himself with Mary his espoused wife</hi>. The ground and circumstances of Mary's
enrolment must obviously have been the same as in the case of Joseph himself. Whether
all this arose from her having been an only child and heiress, as some suppose, so that she
was espoused to Joseph in accordance with Num. 36, 8, 9, it is not necessary here to inquire.
See Michaelis <q>Commentaries on the Laws of Moses,</q> Part II. § 78.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>It is indeed objected, that it was not customary among the Jews to trace back descent
through the female line, that is, on the mother's side. There are, however, examples to
show that this was sometimes done; and in the case of Jesus, as we have seen, there was a
sufficient reason for it. Thus in 1 Chr. 2, 22, Jair is enumerated among the posterity of
Judah by regular descent. But the grandfather of Jair had married the daughter of Machir,
one of the heads of Manasseh, 1 Chr. 2, 21. 7, 14; and therefore in Num. 32, 40. 41, Jair
is called the son (descendant) of Manasseh. In like manner, in Ezra, 2, 61, and Neh. 7,
63, a certain family is spoken of as <q>the children of Barzillai;</q> because their ancestor <q>took
a wife of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called after their name.</q></q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>3. A question is raised as to the identity, in the two genealogies, of the Salathiel and
Zorobabel named as father and son, Matth. 1, 12. Luke 3, 27. The Zorobabel of Matthew
is no doubt the chief, who led back the first band of captives from Babylon, and rebuilt the
temple, Ezra c. 2-6. He is also called the son of Salathiel in Ezra 3, 2. Neb. 12, 1.
Hagg. 1, 1. 2, 2. 23. Were then the Salathiel and Zorobabel of Luke the same persons?
Those who assume this, must rest solely on the identity of the names; for there is no
other possible evidence to prove, either that they were contemporary, or that they were not
different persons. On the other hand, there are one or two considerations, of some force,
which go to show that they were probably not the same persons.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>First, if Salathiel and Zorobabel are indeed the same in both genealogies, then Salathiel
who, according to Matthew, was the son of Jechoniah by natural descent, must have
been called the son of Neri in Luke either from adoption or marriage. In that case, his
connection with David through Nathan, as given by Luke, was not his own personal
genealogy. It is difficult, therefore, to see Luke, after tracing back the descent of
Jesus to Salathiel, should abandon the true personal lineage in the royal line of kings, and
turn aside again to a merely collateral and humbler line. If the mother of Jesus was in
fact descended from the Zorobabel and Salathiel of Matthew, she, like them, was descended
also from David through the royal line. Why rob her of this dignity, and ascribe to her
only a descent through an inferior lineage? See Spanheim Dubia Evangel. I. p. 108, sq.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Again, the mere identity of names under these circumstances, affords no proof; for
nothing is more common even among contemporaries. Thus we have two Ezras; one in
Neh. 12, 1. 13, 33; from whom Ezra the scribe is expressly distinguished in v. 36. We
have likewise two Nehemiahs; one who went up with Zorobabel, Ezra 2, 2; and the other
the governor who went later to Jerusalem, Neh. 2, 9, sq. So too, as contemporaries, Joram
son of Ahab, king of Israel, and Joram (Jehoram,) son of Jehoshaphat, king of Judah;
2 K. 8, 16, coll. v. 23, 24. Also Joash king of Judah, and Joash king of Israel; 2 K.
13, 9, 10. Further, we find in succession among the descendants of Cain the following
names: Enoch, Irad, Mehujael, Methusael, Lamech, Gen. 4, 17, 18; and later among the
descendants of Seth these similar ones: Enoch, Methusalah, Lamech, Gen. 5, 21-25.</q>
See Dr. Robinson's Greek Harmony of the Gospels, pp. 183-187.
</p></note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 <hi rend='italic'>The son</hi> of God, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Adam, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Seth, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Enos,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 <hi rend='italic'>The son</hi> of Cainan, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Maleleel, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Jared, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Enoch, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Mathusala,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 <hi rend='italic'>The son</hi> of Lamech, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Noe, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Sem, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Arphaxad,
<hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Cainan,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 <hi rend='italic'>The son</hi> of Sala, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Heber, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Phalec, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Ragau, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Saruch,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 <hi rend='italic'>The son</hi> of Nachor, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Thara, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Abraham, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Isaac, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Jacob,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 <hi rend='italic'>The son</hi> of Juda, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Phares, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Esrom, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Aram, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Aminadab,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 <hi rend='italic'>The son</hi> of Naasson, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Salmon, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Booz, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Obed, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Jesse,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 <hi rend='italic'>The son</hi> of David, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Nathan, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Mattatha, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi>
of Menan, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Melea,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 <hi rend='italic'>The son</hi> of Eliakim, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Jonan, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Joseph, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Juda, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Simeon,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 <hi rend='italic'>The son</hi> of Levi, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Matthat, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Joram, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Eliezer, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Jose,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 <hi rend='italic'>The son</hi> of Er, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Elmodam,
<hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Cosam, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Addi,
<hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Melchi,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 <hi rend='italic'>The son</hi> of Neri, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Salathiel,
<hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Zorobabel, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Rhesa, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Joanna,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 <hi rend='italic'>The son</hi> of Juda, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Joseph, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Semei, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Mattathias, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Maath,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 <hi rend='italic'>The son</hi> of Nagge, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Esli, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Naum, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Amos, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Mattathias,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 <hi rend='italic'>The son</hi> of Joseph, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Janna, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Melchi, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Levi, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Matthat,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 <hi rend='italic'>The son</hi> of Heli, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Joseph,&mdash;And Jesus himself ... being
(as was supposed)&mdash;</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part II. Announcement And Introduction Of Our Lord's Public Ministry.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Time.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>About one year.</hi>
</p>

<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>

<div>
<head>§ 14. The Ministry of John the Baptist. <hi rend='italic'>The Desert.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>The Jordan.</hi></head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. III. 1-12.</cell><cell>CH. I. 1-8.</cell></row>
<row><cell>In those days came John the Baptist,
preaching in the wilderness of
Judea,</cell><cell>The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God:</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And saying, Repent ye; for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand.</cell><cell>As it is written in the prophets,<note place='foot'>Mal. iii. 1; Is. xl. 3.</note>
Behold, I send my messenger before
thy face, which shall prepare thy way
before thee;</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 For this is he that was spoken of
by the prophet Esaias, saying, The
voice of one crying in the wilderness,
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make
his paths straight.</cell><cell>3 The voice of one crying in the
wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the
Lord, make his paths straight.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And the same John had his raiment
of camel's hair, and a leathern
girdle about his loins; and his meat
was locusts and wild honey.</cell><cell>4 John did baptize in the wilderness,
and preach the baptism of repentance,
for the remission of sins.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5 Then went out to him Jerusalem,
and all Judea, and all the region round
about Jordan.</cell><cell>5 And there went out unto him all
the land of Judea, and they of Jerusalem,
and were all baptized of him
in the river of Jordan, confessing their
sins.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And were baptized of him in Jordan,
confessing their sins.</cell><cell>6 And John was clothed with
camel's hair, and with a girdle of a
skin about his loins; and he did eat
locusts and wild honey;</cell></row>
<row><cell>7 But when he saw many of the
Pharisees and Sadducees come to his
baptism, he said unto them, O generation
of vipers, who hath warned you
to flee from the wrath to come?</cell><cell>7 And preached, saying, There
cometh one mightier than I after me,
the latchet of whose shoes I am not
worthy to stoop down and unloose.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8 Bring forth therefore fruits meet
for repentance:</cell><cell>8 I indeed have baptized you with
water: but he shall baptize you with
the Holy Ghost.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And think not to say within yourselves,
We have Abraham to our
father: for I say unto you, that God
is able of these stones to raise up
children unto Abraham.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And now also the axe is laid
unto the root of the trees: therefore
every tree which bringeth not forth
good fruit is hewn down, and cast
into the fire.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11 I indeed baptize you with water
unto repentance: but he that cometh
after me is mightier than I, whose
shoes I am not worthy to bear: he
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost,
and <hi rend='italic'>with</hi> fire:</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 Whose fan <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> in his hand, and
he will thoroughly purge his floor, and
gather his wheat into the garner; but
he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable
fire.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. III. 1-18.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Now in the fifteenth year of the
reign of Tiberius Cesar, Pontius Pilate
being governor of Judea, and Herod
being tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother
Philip tetrarch of Iturea and of
the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias
the tetrarch of Abilene.</cell></row><row><cell>2 Annas and Caiaphas being the
high priests,<note place='foot'>In the New Testament, the same word is used for <hi rend='italic'>the
high priests</hi>, and the chief priests, who were the heads of the twenty-four courses. So
that the two persons whom the Roman governor considered as the chief of the priests,
and whose names stood as such in those public registers which seem here referred to,
may be intended. An irregularity had arisen out of the confusion of the times: and the
ruler or prince under the Romans, though a chief priest, was a distinct person from the
high priest: Annas being the one, and Caiaphas the other. Scott, <hi rend='italic'>in loc.</hi> See also
Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>in loc.</hi></note> the word of God came
unto John the son of Zacharias in the
wilderness.</cell></row><row><cell>3 And he came into all the country
about Jordan, preaching the baptism
of repentance, for the remission
of sins;</cell></row><row><cell>4 As it is written in the book of
the words of Esaias the prophet, saying,<note place='foot'> Is. xl. 3, seq.</note>
The voice of one crying in the
wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the
Lord, make his paths straight.</cell></row><row><cell>5 Every valley shall be filled, and
every mountain and hill shall be
brought low; and the crooked shall
be made straight, and the rough ways
shall be made smooth;</cell></row><row><cell>6 And all flesh shall see the salvation
of God.</cell></row><row><cell>7 Then said he to the multitude
that came forth to be baptized of him,
O generation of vipers, who hath
warned you to flee from the wrath to
come?</cell></row><row><cell>8 Bring forth therefore fruits worthy
of repentance, and begin not to
say within yourselves, We have Abraham
to <hi rend='italic'>our</hi> father: for I say unto you,
That God is able of these stones to
raise up children unto Abraham.</cell></row><row><cell>9 And now also the axe is laid
unto the root of the trees: every tree
therefore which bringeth not forth
good fruit, is hewn down, and cast
into the fire.</cell></row><row><cell>10 And the people asked him, saying,
What shall we do then?</cell></row><row><cell>11 He answereth and saith unto
them, He that hath two coats, let
him impart to him that hath none;
and he that hath meat, let him do likewise.</cell></row><row><cell>12 Then came also publicans to be
baptized, and said unto him, Master,
what shall we do?</cell></row><row><cell>13 And he said unto them, Exact
no more than that which is appointed
you.</cell></row><row><cell>14 And the soldiers likewise demanded
of him, saying, And what
shall we do? And he said unto them,
Do violence to no man, neither accuse
<hi rend='italic'>any</hi> falsely; and be content with your
wages.</cell></row><row><cell>15 And as the people were in expectation,
and all men mused in their
hearts of John, whether he were the
Christ, or not;</cell></row><row><cell>16 John answered, saying unto <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>
all, I indeed baptize you with water;
but one mightier than I cometh, the
latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy
to unloose: he shall baptize you
with the Holy Ghost, and with fire:</cell></row>
<row><cell>17 Whose fan <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> in his hand, and
he will thoroughly purge his floor, and
will gather the wheat into his garner;
but the chaff he will burn with fire
unquenchable.</cell></row><row><cell>18 And many other things in his
exhortation preached he unto the
people.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>

<div>
<head>§ 15. The Baptism of Jesus. <hi rend='italic'>The Jordan.</hi></head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. III. 13-17.</cell><cell>CH. I. 9-11.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13 Then cometh Jesus from Galilee
to Jordan unto John, to be baptized
of him.</cell><cell>9 And it came to pass in those
days, that Jesus came from Nazareth
of Galilee, and was baptized of John
in Jordan.</cell></row>
<row><cell>14 But John forbade him, saying, I
have need to be baptized of thee, and
comest thou to me?</cell><cell>10 And straightway coming up out
of the water, he saw the heavens
opened, and the Spirit like a dove descending
upon him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And Jesus answering said unto
him, Suffer <hi rend='italic'>it to be so</hi> now: for thus
it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness.
Then he suffered him.</cell><cell>11 And there came a voice from
heaven <hi rend='italic'>saying</hi>, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased.</cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And Jesus, when he was baptized,
when up straightway out of the
water: and lo, the heavens were
opened unto him, and he saw the
Spirit of God descending like a dove,
and lighting upon him:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And lo, a voice from heaven,
saying, This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. III. 21-23.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 Now, when all the people were
baptized, it came to pass, that Jesus
also being baptized,
and praying, the
heaven was opened,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And the Holy Ghost descended
in a bodily shape like a dove upon him,
and a voice came from heaven, which
said, Thou art my beloved Son; in
thee I am well pleased.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And Jesus himself began to be
about thirty years of age.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>

<div>
<head>§ 16. The Temptation. <hi rend='italic'>Desert of Judea</hi></head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IV. 1-11.</cell><cell>CH. I. 12-13.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit
into the wilderness to be tempted of
the devil.</cell><cell>12 And immediately the Spirit
driveth him into the wilderness.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And when he had fasted forty
days and forty nights, he was afterward
an hungered.</cell><cell>13 And he was there in the wilderness
forty days tempted of Satan;
and was with the wild beasts; and
the angels ministered unto him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And when the tempter came to
him, he said, If thou be the Son of
God, command that these stones be
made bread.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 But he answered and said, It is
written<note place='foot'>Deut. viii. 3.</note> Man shall not live by bread
alone, but by every word that proceedeth
out of the mouth of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 Then the devil taketh him up
into the holy city, and setteth him on
a pinnacle of the temple,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And saith unto him, If thou be
the Son of God cast thyself down, for
it is written<note place='foot'>Deut. vi. 16.</note> He shall give his angels
charge concerning thee: and in <hi rend='italic'>their</hi>
hands they shall bear thee up, lest at
any time thou dash thy foot against a
stone.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 Jesus said unto him, It is written
again,<note place='foot'>Ps. xci. 11.</note> Thou shalt not tempt the Lord
thy God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 Again, the devil taketh him up
into an exceeding high mountain and
sheweth him all the kingdoms of the
world, and the glory of them:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And saith unto him, All these
things will I give thee, if thou wilt
fall down and worship me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 Then saith Jesus unto him, Get
thee hence, Satan: for it is written,<note place='foot'>Deut. vi. 13.</note>
Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shalt thou serve.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 Then the devil leaveth him, and
behold, angels came and ministered
unto him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IV. 1-13.<note place='foot'>There is a seeming discrepancy between Matthew and Luke, in the order of
the temptations; but Luke does not affirm the order; whereas Matthew uses particles, in
v. 2 and 8, which seem to fix it as he has written. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>And Jesus, being full of the Holy
Ghost, returned from Jordan, and was
led by the Spirit into the wilderness,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 Being forty days tempted of the
devil. And in those days he did eat
nothing: and when they were ended,
he afterward hungered.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And the devil said unto him, If
thou be the Son of God, command this
stone that it be made bread.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And Jesus answered him, saying,
It is written, That man shall not live
by bread alone, but by every word of
God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And he brought him to Jerusalem,
and set him on a pinnacle of the temple,
and said unto him, If thou be the
Son of God, cast thyself down from
hence:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 For it is written, He shall give
his angels charge over thee, to keep
thee:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And in <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> hands they shall
bear thee up, lest at any time thou
dash thy foot against a stone.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And Jesus answering, said unto
him, It is said, Thou shalt not tempt
the Lord thy God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And the devil, taking him up into
a high mountain, shewed unto him, all
the kingdoms of the world in a moment
of time.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And the devil said unto him, All
this power will I give thee, and the
glory of them: for that is delivered
unto me, and to whomsoever I will,
I give it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 If thou therefore wilt worship
me, all shall be thine.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And Jesus answered and said
unto him, Get thee behind me, Satan:
for it is written, Thou shalt worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shalt
thou serve.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And when the devil had ended
all the temptation, he departed from
him for a season.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>

<div>
<head>§ 17. Preface to John's Gospel.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>CH. I. 1-18.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>In the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2 The same was in the beginning
with God.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>3 All things were made by him;
and without him was not anything
made that was made.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>4 In him was life; and the life was
the light of men.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5 And the light shineth in darkness;
and the darkness comprehended
it not.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>6 There was a man sent from God,
whose name <hi rend='italic'>was</hi> John.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>7 The same came for a witness, to
bear witness of the Light, that all <hi rend='italic'>men</hi>
through him might believe.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>8 He was not that Light, but <hi rend='italic'>was
sent</hi> to bear witness of that light.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>9 <hi rend='italic'>That</hi> was the true Light, which
lighteth every man that cometh into
the world.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>10 He was in the world, and the
world was made by him, and the world
knew him not.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>11 He came unto his own, and his
own received him not.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>12 But as many as received him, to
them gave he power to become the
sons of God, <hi rend='italic'>even</hi> to them that believe
on his name:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13 Which were born, not of blood,
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14 And the Word was made flesh,
and dwelt among us, (and we beheld
his glory, the glory as of the only begotten
of the Father,) full of grace and
truth.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15 John bare witness of him, and
cried, saying, This was he of whom I
spake, He that cometh after me, is
preferred before me; for he was before
me.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>16 And of his fulness have all we
received, and grace for grace.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17 For the law was given by Moses,
<hi rend='italic'>but</hi> grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18 No man hath seen God at any
time; the only begotten Son, which is
in the bosom of the Father, he hath
declared <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>

<div>
<head>§ 18. Testimony of John the Baptist to Jesus. <hi rend='italic'>Bethany beyond Jordan</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>CH. I. 19-34.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>19 And this is the record of John,
when the Jews sent priests and Levites
from Jerusalem, to ask him, Who art
thou?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20 And he confessed, and denied
not; but confessed, I am not the
Christ.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21 And they asked him, What
then? Art thou Elias? And he saith,
I am not. Art thou that prophet?
And he answered, No.<note place='foot'>John means that he was not really Elias risen from the dead. But
when Jesus says, (Matth. xvii. 12, and xi. 14,) that Elias was come already, he means
that John had appeared <hi rend='italic'>in the spirit and power of Elias</hi>. Luke i. 17. Thus
likewise, John here denies that he is one of the ancient prophets again appearing on earth: see
Luke ix 19; with which our Lord's assertion that he was an eminent prophet, Luke vii.
28, seems perfectly consistent.  Newcome.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22 Then said they unto him, Who
art thou? that we may give an answer
to them that sent us. What sayest
thou of thyself?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>23 He said,<note place='foot'>Is. xl. 3.</note> I am the voice of
one crying in the wilderness, Make
straight the way of the Lord, as said
the prophet Esaias.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>24 And they which were sent were
of the Pharisees.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>25 And they asked him, and said
unto him, Why baptizest thou then,
if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias,
neither that prophet?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>26 John answered them, saying, I
baptize with water: but there standeth
one among you, whom ye know
not.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>27 He it is, who coming after me,
is preferred before me, whose shoe's
latchet I am not worthy to unloose.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>28 These things were done in
Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John
was baptizing.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>29 The next day John seeth Jesus
coming unto him, and saith, Behold
the Lamb of God, which taketh away
the sin of the world!</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>30 This is he of whom I said, After
me cometh a man which is preferred
before me; for he was before me.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31 And I knew him not: but that
he should be made manifest to Israel,
therefore am I come baptizing with
water.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>32 And John bare record, saying,
I saw the Spirit descending from heaven
like a dove, and it abode upon
him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>33 And I knew him not: but he
that sent me to baptize with water,
the same said unto me, Upon whom
thou shalt see the Spirit descending
and remaining on him, the same is he
which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>34 And I saw and bare record, that
this is the Son of God.</cell></row>
</table>
</div>

<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>

<div>
<head>§ 19. Jesus gains disciples. <hi rend='italic'>The Jordan. Galilee</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>CH. I. 35-51.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35 Again the next day after, John
stood, and two of his disciples;</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>36 And looking upon Jesus as he
walked, he saith, Behold the Lamb of
God!</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>37 And the two disciples heard him
speak, and they followed Jesus.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>38 Then Jesus turned, and saw
them following, and saith unto them,
What seek ye? They said unto him,
Rabbi, (which is to say, being interpreted,
Master,) where dwellest
thou?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>39 He saith unto them, Come and
see. They came and saw where he
dwelt, and abode with him that day:
for it was about the tenth hour.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>40 One of the two which heard
John <hi rend='italic'>speak</hi>, and followed him, was
Andrew, Simon Peter's brother.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>41 He first findeth his own brother
Simon, and saith unto him, We have
found the Messias; which is, being
interpreted, the Christ.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>42 And he brought him to Jesus.
And when Jesus beheld him, he said,
Thou art Simon the son of Jona: thou
shalt be called Cephas; which is, by
interpretation, a stone.<note place='foot'>Kings and princes very often changed the names of those
who held offices under them, particularly when they first attracted their notice and were taken
into their employ; and when subsequently they were elevated to some new station,
and crowned with additional honours. Gen. xli. 45; and xvii. 5; and xxxii. 28;
and xxxv. 10; 2 Kin. xxiii. 34, 35; and xxiv. 17; Dan. i. 6. Hence a name (<hi rend='italic'>a new
name</hi>) occurs topically, as a token of honour, in Phil. ii. 9; Heb. i. 4; Rev. ii. 17. See
also Mark iii. 17. Jahn's Archæol. § 164.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>43 The day following Jesus would
go forth into Galilee, and findeth
Philip, and saith unto him, Follow
me.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>44 Now Philip was of Bethsaida,
the city of Andrew and Peter.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>45 Philip findeth Nathanael,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Nathanael</hi>.
This apostle is supposed to be the same with <hi rend='italic'>Bartholomew</hi>,
of whom John says nothing; and the others make no mention of <hi rend='italic'>Nathanael</hi>. This
seems to have been his proper name; since the name of <hi rend='italic'>Bartholomew</hi> is not a proper name,
but only signifies <hi rend='italic'>the son of Ptolomy</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Nathanael</hi> is also ranked among the Apostles to
whom Jesus showed himself. <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> xxi. 2-4. A. Clarke, <hi rend='italic'>in loc</hi>.</note> and
saith unto him, We have found him
of whom Moses in the law, and the
prophets, did write, Jesus of Nazareth
the son of Joseph.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>46 And Nathanael said unto him,
Can there any good thing come out of
Nazareth? Philip saith unto him,
Come and see.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>47 Jesus saw Nathanael coming to
him, and saith of him, Behold an
Israelite indeed, in whom is no
guile!</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>48 Nathanael saith unto him,
Whence knowest thou me? Jesus
answered and said unto him, Before
that Philip called thee, when
thou wast under the fig-tree, I saw
thee.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>49 Nathanael answered and saith
unto him, Rabbi, thou art the Son
of God; thou art the King of Israel.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>50 Jesus answered and said unto
him, Because I said unto thee, I saw
thee under the fig-tree, believest thou?
thou shalt see greater things than
these.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>51 And he saith unto him, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Hereafter ye
shall see heaven open, and the angels
of God ascending and descending
upon the<note place='foot'>Gen. xxviii. 12.</note> Son of man.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>

<div>
<head>§ 20. The Marriage at Cana of Galilee.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>CH. II. 1-12.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>And the third day there was a marriage
in Cana of Galilee; and the
mother of Jesus was there.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2 And both Jesus was called, and
his disciples, to the marriage.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>3 And when they wanted wine, the
mother of Jesus saith unto him, They
have no wine.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>4 Jesus saith unto her, Woman,
what have I to do with thee? mine
hour is not yet come.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5 His mother saith unto the servants,
Whatsoever he saith unto you,
do <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>6 And there were set there six
water-pots of stone, after the manner
of the purifying of the Jews, containing
two or three firkins apiece.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>7 Jesus saith unto them, Fill the
water-pots with water. And they
filled them up to the brim.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>8 And he saith unto them, Draw
out now, and bear unto the governor
of the feast. And they bare <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>9 When the ruler of the feast had
tasted the water that was made wine,
and knew not whence it was, (but the
servants which drew the water knew,)
the governor of the feast called the
bridegroom,</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>10 And saith unto him, Every man
at the beginning doth set forth good
wine; and when men have well
drunk, then that which is worse: <hi rend='italic'>but</hi>
thou hast kept the good wine until
now.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>11 This beginning of miracles did
Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested
forth his glory; and his disciples
believed on him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>12 After this he went down to
Capernaum, he, and his mother, and
his brethren, and his disciples; and
they continued there not many days.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part III. Our Lord's First Passover, And The Subsequent Transactions
Until The Second.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Time.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>One year.</hi>
</p>

<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>

<div>
<head>§ 21. At the Passover Jesus drives the traders out of the Temple. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>CH. II. 13-25.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13 And the Jews' passover was at
hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14 And found in the temple those
that sold oxen, and sheep, and doves,
and the changers of money, sitting:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15 And when he had made a
scourge of small cords, he drove them
all out of the temple, and the sheep,
and the oxen; and poured out the
changers' money, and overthrew the
tables;</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>16 And said unto them that sold
doves, Take these things hence:
make not my Father's house an house
of merchandise.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17 And his disciples remembered
that it was written,<note place='foot'>Ps. lxix. 9.</note> The zeal of thine
house hath eaten me up.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18 Then answered the Jews, and
said unto him, What sign shewest
thou unto us, seeing that thou dost
these things?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>19 Jesus answered and said unto
them, Destroy this temple, and in three
days I will raise it up.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20 Then said the Jews, Forty and
six years was this temple in building,
and wilt thou rear it up in three days?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21 But he spake of the temple of
his body.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22 When therefore he was risen
from the dead, his disciples remembered
that he had said this unto them:
and they believed the scripture, and
the word which Jesus had said.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>23 Now, when he was in Jerusalem
at the passover, in the <hi rend='italic'>feast-day</hi>,
many believed in his name, when they
saw the miracles which he did.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>24 But Jesus did not commit himself
unto them, because he knew all
<hi rend='italic'>men</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>25 And needed not that any should
testify of man: for he knew what was
in man.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 22. Our Lord's discourse with Nicodemus. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>CH. III. 1-21.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>There was a man of the Pharisees
named Nicodemus, a ruler of the
Jews:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2 The same came to Jesus by night,
and said unto him, Rabbi, we know
that thou art a teacher come from
God: for no man can do these miracles
that thou doest, except God be
with him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>3 Jesus answered and said unto him,
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except
a man be born again, he cannot see
the kingdom of God.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>4 Nicodemus saith unto him, How
can a man be born when he is old?
can he enter the second time into his
mother's womb, and be born?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5 Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I
say unto thee, Except a man be born
of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>6 That which is born of the flesh,
is flesh; and that which is born of the
Spirit, is spirit.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>7 Marvel not that I said unto thee,
Ye must be born again.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>8 The wind bloweth where it listeth,
and thou hearest the sound thereof,
but canst not tell whence it cometh,
and whither it goeth: so is every
one that is born of the Spirit.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>9 Nicodemus answered and said
unto him, How can these things be?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>10 Jesus answered and said unto
him, Art thou a master of Israel, and
knowest not these things?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>11 Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
We speak that we do know, and testify
that we have seen; and ye receive
not our witness.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>12 If I have told you earthly things,
and ye believe not, how shall ye believe
if I tell you <hi rend='italic'>of</hi> heavenly things?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13 And no man hath ascended up
to heaven, but he that came down from
heaven, <hi rend='italic'>even</hi> the Son of man which is
in heaven.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14 And as<note place='foot'>Numb. xxi. 8, seq.</note> Moses lifted up the serpent
in the wilderness, even so must
the Son of man be lifted up:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15 That whosoever believeth in him
should not perish, but have eternal
life.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>16 For God so loved the world, that
he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believeth in him, should
not perish, but have everlasting life.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17 For God sent not his Son into
the world to condemn the world, but
that the world through him might be
saved.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18 He that believeth on him, is not
condemned: but he that believeth not,
is condemned already, because he
hath not believed in the name of the
only begotten Son of God.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>19 And this is the condemnation,
that light is come into the world, and
men loved darkness rather than light,
because their deeds were evil.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20 For every one that doeth evil
hateth the light, neither cometh to the
light, lest his deeds should be reproved.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21 But he that doeth truth, cometh
to the light, that his deeds may be
made manifest, that they are wrought
in God.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>

<div>
<head>§ 23. Jesus remains in Judea and baptizes.
Further testimony of John the Baptist.</head>


<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>CH. III. 22-36.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22 After these things came Jesus
and his disciples into the land of
Judea; and there he tarried with them,
and baptized.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>23 And John also was baptizing in
Ænon, near to Salim, because there
was much water there: and they
came, and were baptized.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>24 For John was not yet cast into
prison.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>25 Then there arose a question between
<hi rend='italic'>some</hi> of John's disciples and the
Jews, about purifying.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>26 And they came unto John and
said unto him, Rabbi, he that was
with thee beyond Jordan, to whom
thou bearest witness, behold, the same
baptizeth, and all men come to him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>27 John answered and said, A man
can receive nothing, except it be given
him from heaven.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>28 Ye yourselves bear me witness,
that I said, I am not the Christ, but
that I am sent before him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>29 He that hath the bride is the
bridegroom: but the friend of the
bridegroom, which standeth and heareth
him, rejoiceth greatly, because of
the bridegroom's voice: this my joy
therefore is fulfilled.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>30 He must increase, but I must
decrease.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31 He that cometh from above, is
above all: he that is of the earth is
earthly, and speaketh of the earth: he
that cometh from heaven is above all.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>32 And what he hath seen, and
heard, that he testifieth; and no man
receiveth his testimony.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>33 He that hath received his testimony,
hath set to his seal that God is
true.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>34 For he whom God hath sent,
speaketh the words of God: for God
giveth not the Spirit by measure <hi rend='italic'>unto
him</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35 The Father loveth the Son, and
hath given all things into his hand.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>36 He that believeth on the Son
hath everlasting life: and he that
believeth not the Son, shall not see
life; but the wrath of God abideth
on him.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>

<div>
<head>§ 24. Jesus departs into Galilee after John's imprisonment.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IV. 12.</cell><cell>CH. I. 14.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 Now, when Jesus had heard that
John was cast into prison, he departed
into Galilee.</cell><cell>14 Now, after that John was put in
prison, Jesus came into Galilee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIV. 3-5.</cell><cell>CH. VI. 17-20.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 For Herod had laid hold on John,
and bound him, and put <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> in prison
for Herodias' sake, his brother Philip's
wife.</cell><cell>17 For Herod himself had sent
forth and laid hold upon John, and
bound him in prison for Herodias'
sake, his brother Philip's wife: for he
had married her.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4 For John said unto him, It is not
lawful for thee to have her.</cell><cell>18 For John had said unto Herod,
It is not lawful for thee to have thy
brother's wife.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And when he would have put him
to death, he feared the multitude, because
they counted him as a prophet.</cell><cell>19 Therefore Herodias had a quarrel
against him, and would have killed
him; but she could not:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20 For Herod feared John, knowing
that he was a just man and an holy,
and observed him: and when he heard
him, he did many things, and heard
him gladly.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IV. 14.</cell><cell>CH. IV. 1-3.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>When therefore the Lord knew
how the Pharisees had heard that
Jesus made and baptized more disciples
than John,</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2 (Though Jesus himself baptized
not, but his disciples,)</cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And Jesus returned in the power
of the Spirit into Galilee:</cell><cell>3 He left Judea, and departed again
into Galilee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. III. 19, 20.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 But Herod the tetrarch, being reproved
by him for Herodias his brother
Philip's wife, and for all the evils
which Herod had done,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 Added yet this above all, that he
shut up John in prison.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>

<div>
<head>§ 25. Our Lord's discourse with the Samaritan woman.
Many Samaritans believe on him. <hi rend='italic'>Shechem</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>Neapolis</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>CH. IV. 4-42.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>4 And he must needs go through
Samaria.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5 Then cometh he to a city of Samaria,
which is called Sychar, near to
the parcel of ground that Jacob gave
to his son Joseph.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>6 Now Jacob's well was there.
Jesus therefore being wearied with
<hi rend='italic'>his</hi> journey, sat thus on the well: and
it was about the sixth hour.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>7 There cometh a woman of Samaria
to draw water; Jesus saith unto
her, Give me to drink.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>8 (For his disciples were gone away
unto the city to buy meat.)</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>9 Then saith the woman of Samaria
unto him, How is it that thou, being
a Jew, askest drink of me, which
am a woman of Samaria? for the
Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>10 Jesus answered and said unto
her, If thou knewest the gift of God,
and who it is that saith to thee, Give
me to drink; thou wouldest have asked
of him, and he would have given thee
living water.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>11 The woman saith unto him, Sir,
thou hast nothing to draw with, and
the well is deep: from whence then
hast thou that living water?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>12 Art thou greater than our father
Jacob, which gave us the well, and
drank thereof himself, and his children,
and his cattle?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13 Jesus answered and said unto
her, Whosoever drinketh of this water,
shall thirst again:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14 But whosoever drinketh of the
water that I shall give him, shall never
thirst; but the water that I shall give
him, shall be in him a well of water
springing up into everlasting life.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15 The woman saith unto him, Sir,
give me this water, that I thirst not,
neither come hither to draw.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>16 Jesus saith unto her, Go call thy
husband, and come hither.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17 The woman answered and said,
I have no husband. Jesus said unto
her, Thou hast well said, I have no
husband:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18 For thou hast had five husbands,
and he whom thou now hast, is
not thy husband: in that saidst thou
truly.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>19 The woman saith unto him, Sir,
I perceive that thou art a prophet.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20 Our fathers worshipped in this
mountain; and ye say, that in Jerusalem
is the place where men ought to
worship.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21 Jesus saith unto her, Woman,
believe me, the hour cometh, when ye
shall neither in this mountain, nor yet
at Jerusalem, worship the Father.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22 Ye worship ye know not what:
we know what we worship, for salvation
is of the Jews.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>23 But the hour cometh, and now
is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and in
truth: for the Father seeketh such to
worship him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>24 God is a Spirit: and they that
worship him, must worship him in
spirit and in truth.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>25 The woman saith unto him, I
know that the Messias cometh, which is
called Christ; when he is come, he
will tell us all things.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>26 Jesus saith unto her, I that
speak unto thee am he.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>27 And upon this came his disciples,
and marvelled that he talked
with the woman: yet no man said,
What seekest thou? or, Why talkest
thou with her?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>28 The woman then left her waterpot,
and went her way into the city,
and saith to the men,</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>29 Come, see a man which told me
all things that ever I did: is not this
the Christ?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>30 Then they went out of the city,
and came unto him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31 In the meanwhile his disciples
prayed him, saying, Master, eat.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>32 But he said unto them, I have
meat to eat that ye not know of.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>33 Therefore said the disciples one
to another, Hath any man brought him
aught to eat?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>34 Jesus saith unto them, My meat
is to do the will of him that sent me,
and to finish his work.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35 Say not ye, There are yet four
months, and <hi rend='italic'>then</hi> cometh harvest? behold,
I say unto you, Lift up your
eyes, and look on the fields; for they
are white already to harvest.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>36 And he that reapeth receiveth
wages, and gathereth fruit unto life
eternal: that both he that soweth,
and he that reapeth, may rejoice
together.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>37 And herein is that saying true,
One soweth, and another reapeth.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>38 I sent you to reap that whereon
ye bestowed no labour: other men laboured,
and ye are entered into their
labours.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>39 And many of the Samaritans of
that city believed on him for the saying
of the woman, which testified, He
told me all that ever I did.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>40 So when the Samaritans were
come unto him, they besought him
that he would tarry with them: and
he abode there two days.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>41 And many more believed, because
of his own word;</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>42 And said unto the woman, Now
we believe, not because of thy saying:
for we have heard <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> ourselves, and
know that this is indeed the Christ,
the Saviour of the world.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>

<div>
<head>§ 26. Jesus teaches publicly in Galilee.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IV. 17.</cell><cell>CH. I. 14, 15.</cell></row>
<row><cell>17 From that time Jesus began to
preach, and to say, Repent: for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand.</cell><cell>preaching the gospel of the kingdom of
God,</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15 And saying, the time is fulfilled,
and the kingdom of God is at
hand; repent ye, and believe the gospel.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IV. 14, 15.</cell><cell>CH. IV. 43-45.</cell></row>
<row><cell>and there went out a fame of him
through all the region round about.</cell><cell>43 Now, after two days he departed
thence, and went into Galilee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And he taught in their synagogues,
being glorified of all.</cell><cell>44 For Jesus himself testified, that
a prophet hath no honour in his own
country.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>45 Then when he was come into
Galilee, the Galileans received him,
having seen all the things that he did
at Jerusalem at the feast: for they
also went unto the feast.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 27. Jesus, again at Cana, heals the son of a nobleman lying ill at Capernaum. <hi rend='italic'>Cana of Galilee</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>CH. IV. 46-54.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>46 So Jesus came again into Cana
of Galilee, where he made the water
wine. And there was a certain nobleman,
whose son was sick at Capernaum.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>47 When he heard that Jesus was
come out of Judea into Galilee, he
went unto him, and besought him that
he would come down, and heal his
son: for he was at the point of
death.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>48 Then said Jesus unto him, Except
ye see signs and wonders, ye will
not believe.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>49 The nobleman saith unto him,
Sir, come down ere my child die.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>50 Jesus saith unto him, Go thy
way; thy son liveth. And the man
believed the word that Jesus had
spoken unto him, and he went his
way.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>51 And as he was now going down,
his servants met him, and told <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>,
saying, Thy son liveth.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>52 Then inquired he of them the
hour when he began to amend. And
they said unto him, Yesterday at the
seventh hour the fever left him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>53 So the father knew that <hi rend='italic'>it was</hi>
at the same hour, in the which Jesus
said unto him, Thy son liveth: and
himself believed, and his whole
house.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>54 This <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> again the second miracle
<hi rend='italic'>that</hi> Jesus did, when he was come
out of Judea into Galilee.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>

<div>
<head>§ 28. Jesus is rejected at Nazareth, and fixes his abode at Capernaum.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IV. 13-16.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And leaving Nazareth, he came
and dwelt in Capernaum, which is
upon the sea-coast, in the borders of
Zabulon and Napthalim;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 That it might be fulfilled which
was spoken by Esaias the prophet,
saying,<note place='foot'>Is. ix. 1.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 The land of Zabulon, and the
land of Napthalim, <hi rend='italic'>by</hi> the way of
the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the
Gentiles:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 The people which sat in darkness,
saw great light; and to them
which sat in the region and shadow
of death, light is sprung up.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IV. 16-31.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And he came to Nazareth, where
he had been brought up: and, as his
custom was, he went into the synagogue
on the sabbath-day, and stood
up for to read.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And there was delivered unto
him the book of the prophet Esaias.
And when he had opened the book,
he found the place where it was written,<note place='foot'>Is. lxi. 1, and lviii. 6.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 The Spirit of the Lord <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> upon
me, because he hath anointed me to 
preach the gospel to the poor; he
hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted,
to preach deliverance to the
captives, and recovering of sight to
the blind, to set at liberty them that
are bruised,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 To preach the acceptable year
of the Lord.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And he closed the book, and he gave
it again to the minister,<note place='foot'>This word denotes only a subordinate officer, who
attended the minister and obeyed his orders in what concerned the more servile part of
the work. Among other things he had charge of the sacred books, and delivered them to
those to whom he was commanded by his superiors to deliver them. After the reading
was over, he deposited them in their proper place. <hi rend='smallcaps'>campbell</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>in loc</hi>.</note> and sat down.<note place='foot'>The
service of the synagogue consisted of reading the
scriptures, prayer, and preaching. The posture in which the latter was performed,
whether in the synagogue or elsewhere, (see <hi rend='italic'>Matth</hi>. v. 1; <hi rend='italic'>Luke</hi> v. 3,) was sitting.
Accordingly when our Saviour had read the portion of scripture, in the synagogue at
Nazareth, of which he was a member, having been brought up in that city, and then,
instead of retiring to his place, <hi rend='italic'>sat down</hi> in the desk or pulpit, it is said <q>the eyes of all
that were present were fastened upon him,</q> because they perceived, by this posture, that he
was about to preach to them. See also Acts xiii. 14, 15. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jennings</hi>, Ant. 375.</note>
And the eyes of all them that were in
the synagogue were fastened on him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And he began to say unto them,
This day is the scripture fulfilled in
your ears.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And all bare him witness, and
wondered at the gracious words which
proceeded out of his mouth. And
they said, Is not this Joseph's son?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And he said unto them, Ye will
surely say unto me this proverb, Physician,
heal thyself: whatsoever we
have heard done in Capernaum, do
also here in thy country.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 And he said, Verily, I say unto
you, No prophet is accepted in his
own country.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 But I tell you of a truth, many
widows were in Israel in the days of
Elias, when the heaven was shut up
three years and six months, when great
famine was throughout all the land:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 But unto none of them was
Elias sent, save unto Sarepta, a <hi rend='italic'>city</hi>
of Sidon, unto a woman <hi rend='italic'>that was</hi> a
widow.<note place='foot'>1 Kings xvii. 1, 9.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And many lepers were in Israel
in the time of Eliseus the prophet; and
none of them was cleansed, saving
Naaman the Syrian.<note place='foot'>2 Kings v. 14.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 And all they in the synagogue,
when they heard these things, were
filled with wrath,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And rose up, and thrust him out
of the city, and led him unto the brow
of the hill,<note place='foot'>The accuracy of this description is attested by
travellers, to this day. See <hi rend='smallcaps'>Robinson's</hi> Travels in Palestine, vol. iii., pp. 186, 187.</note> (whereon their city was
built,) that they might cast him down
headlong.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 But he, passing through the
midst of them, went his way,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 And came down to Capernaum,
a city of Galilee,</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>

<div>
<head>§ 29. The call of Simon Peter and Andrew, and of James
and John, with the miraculous draught of fishes. <hi rend='italic'>Near Capernaum</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IV. 18-22.</cell><cell>CH. I. 16-20.</cell></row>
<row><cell>18 And Jesus, walking<note place='foot'><p>Matthew says that the disciples were called by Christ
while walking by the sea, because that calling followed the walk by the sea. <q>We say
that a thing was done by one walking in this or that place, because he took such a
walk, whether he who did the act was then walking, or sitting or standing.</q> Spanb.
dub. lxxii. v. 2. This remark reconciles <q><hi rend='italic'>walking</hi>,</q> Matth. iv. 18 with <q><hi rend='italic'>stood</hi>,</q>
Luke v. 1. A like remark may be made with respect to the passages placed parallel
to Luke v. 6. Jesus is concisely represented as if he had at first seen Peter and
Andrew casting a net into the sea, because they were employed thus in consequence of
the interview.
</p>
<p>
Luke does not deny that more than Simon were seen, nor does he affirm that Simon
was seen. Indeed our Lord is said to have seen two ships by the lake. The
calling of others beside Simon not only is not denied by Luke, but is sufficiently indicated
in v. 11. The words of Matthew (v. 21) <q>going on from thence,</q> are not to be
understood as implying a great distance, but as relating to the neighbouring shore.
Matthew relates the principal fact, the calling and the following; Luke has the accompanying
circumstances. And there is a remarkable harmony between them. Matthew
records the repairing of their nets by the fishermen; Luke shows how they became
broken,&mdash;by the great draught they had taken. What is related by Luke, is not denied
by Matthew, but omitted only. Nothing, indeed, is more common than to find the
omission of some supplied by the other Evangelists. <hi rend='smallcaps'>newcome</hi>.</p></note> by the sea
of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon
called Peter, and Andrew his brother,</cell><cell>16 Now as he walked by the sea of
Galilee, he saw Simon, and Andrew his brother,</cell></row>
<row><cell>casting a net into the sea; for they
were fishers.</cell><cell>casting a net into the sea:
for they were fishers.</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And he saith unto them, Follow
me, and I will make you fishers of
men.</cell><cell>17 And Jesus said unto them, Come
ye after me, and I will make you to
become fishers of men.</cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And they straightway left <hi rend='italic'>their</hi>
nets, and followed him.</cell><cell>18 And straightway they forsook
their nets, and followed him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And going on from thence, he
saw other two brethren, James <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi>
of Zebedee, and John his brother, in
a ship with Zebedee their father,<note place='foot'>The death of Zebedee is nowhere mentioned
in the gospels; yet an undesigned coincidence, and proof of the veracity of the
Evangelists, is evident by comparing this place with others, in which his death is tacitly
alluded to. Thus, in Chap. viii. 21, it is related that <q>another of his <hi rend='italic'>disciples</hi> said
unto him, Lord, suffer me first to go and <hi rend='italic'>bury my father</hi>;</q> and in Chap. xx. 20, it is
said, <q>Then came to him the <hi rend='italic'>mother of Zebedee's children</hi> with her sons, worshipping
him,</q> &amp;c. See also Chap. xxvii. 55. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Blunt</hi>, Veracity of the Gospels, Sec. I. 2.
See note on Mark vi. 3; Post, § 55.</note>
mending their nets: and he called
them.</cell><cell>19 And when he had gone a little
farther thence, he saw James the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi>
of Zebedee, and John his brother, who
also were in the ship mending their nets.</cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And they immediately left the
ship, and their father, and followed him.</cell><cell>20 And straightway he called them:
and they left their father Zebedee in
the ship with the hired servants, and went after him.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. V. 1-11.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>And it came to pass, that as the
people pressed upon him to hear the
word of God, he stood by the lake of
Gennesaret,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And saw two ships standing by
the lake: but the fishermen were
gone out of them, and were washing
their nets.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And he entered into one of the
ships which was Simon's, and prayed
him that he would thrust out a little
from the land. And he sat down, and
taught the people out of the ship.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 Now, when he had left speaking,
he said unto Simon, Launch out into
the deep, and let down your nets for
a draught.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And Simon, answering, said unto
him, Master, we have toiled all the
night, and have taken nothing; nevertheless,
at thy word I will let down
the net.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And when they had this done,
they enclosed a great multitude of
fishes: and their net brake.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And they beckoned unto <hi rend='italic'>their</hi>
partners, which were in the other ship,
that they should come and help them.
And they came, and filled both the
ships, so that they began to sink.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 When Simon Peter saw <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, he
fell down at Jesus' knees, saying, Depart
from me; for I am a sinful man,
O Lord.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 For he was astonished, and all
that were with him, at the draught of
the fishes which they had taken:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And so was also James and
John the sons of Zebedee, which were
partners with Simon. And Jesus said
unto Simon, Fear not: from henceforth
thou shalt catch men.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And when they had brought
their ships to land, they forsook all,
and followed him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>

<div>
<head>§ 30. The healing of a demoniac
in the Synagogue. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Mark.</cell><cell>Luke.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. I. 21-28.</cell><cell>CH. IV. 31-37.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And they went into Capernaum;
and straightway on the sabbath-day
he entered into the synagogue and
taught.</cell><cell>and taught them on the Sabbath-days.</cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And they were astonished at his
doctrine: for he taught them as one that
had authority, and not as the scribes.</cell><cell>32 And they were astonished at
his doctrine: for his word was with power.</cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And there was in their synagogue
a man with an unclean spirit; and he cried out,</cell><cell>33 And in the synagogue there was
a man which had a spirit of an unclean
devil; and he cried out with a loud voice,</cell></row>
<row><cell>24 Saying, Let us alone; what
have we to do with thee, thou Jesus
of Nazareth? art thou, come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art,
the Holy One of God.</cell><cell>34 Saying, Let <hi rend='italic'>us</hi> alone; what
have we to do with thee, <hi rend='italic'>thou</hi> Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God.</cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And Jesus rebuked him, saying,
Hold thy peace, and come out of him.</cell><cell>35 And Jesus rebuked him, saying,
Hold thy peace, and come out of
him. And when the devil had thrown
him in the midst, he came out of him,
and hurt him not.</cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And when the unclean spirit
had torn him,<note place='foot'>There is no inconsistency between this place and the last
clause of Luke iv. 35. The word translated <hi rend='italic'>torn</hi>, signifies to move, agitate, convulse.
It occurs only twice in the Septuagint. In 2. Sam. xxii. 8, the Hebrew signifies to be
shaken, <hi rend='italic'>ut in terræ motu</hi>. In Jer. iv. 19, it is applied to commotion of mind. Here,
the demoniac was violently agitated; but the agitation left no lasting bad effect; he was
restored to perfect health and soundness. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note> and cried with a loud
voice, he came out of him.</cell><cell>36 And they were all amazed, and
spake among themselves, saying, What
a word <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> this! for with authority and
power he commandeth the unclean
spirits, and they come out.</cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And they were all amazed, insomuch
that they questioned among
themselves, saying, What thing is
this? what new doctrine <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> this? for
with authority commandeth he even
the unclean spirits, and they do obey
him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 And immediately his fame spread
abroad throughout all the region round
about Galilee.</cell><cell>37 And the fame of him went out
into every place of the country round
about.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>

<div>
<head>§ 31. The healing of Peter's wife's mother
and many others. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VIII. 14-17.</cell><cell>CH. I. 29-34.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>29 And forthwith, when they were
come out of the synagogue, they entered into the house of Simon and
Andrew, with James and John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And when Jesus was come into Peter's house, he saw his wife's mother laid, and
sick of a fever.</cell><cell>30 But Simon's wife's mother lay sick of a fever; and anon they tell
him of her.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And he touched her hand, and the fever left her: and she arose, and
ministered unto them.</cell><cell>31 And he came and took her by
the hand, and lifted her up; and immediately the fever left her, and she
ministered unto them.</cell></row>
<row><cell>16 When the even was come, they brought unto him many that were
possessed with devils: and he cast out the spirits with <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> word, and
healed all that were sick;</cell><cell>32 And at even when the sun did
set, they brought unto him all that were diseased, and them that were
possessed with devils.</cell></row>
<row><cell>17 That it might be fulfilled which
was spoken by Esaias the prophet,
saying,<note place='foot'>Is. liii. 4.</note> Himself took our infirmities,
and bare <hi rend='italic'>our</hi> sicknesses.</cell><cell>33 And all the city was gathered
together at the door.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>34 And he healed many that were
sick of divers diseases, and cast out many devils; and suffered not the
devils to speak, because they knew him.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IV. 38-41.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 And he arose out of the synagogue,
and entered into Simon's house.
And Simon's wife's mother was taken
with a great fever; and they besought
him for her.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 And he stood over her, and rebuked
the fever; and it left her: and
immediately she arose and ministered
unto them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 Now, when the sun was setting,
all they that had any sick with divers
diseases, brought them unto him: and
he laid his hands on every one of
them, and healed them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 And devils also came out of
many, crying out, and saying, Thou
art Christ the Son of God. And he,
rebuking <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>, suffered them not to
speak: for they knew that he was
Christ.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 32. Jesus with his disciples goes from Capernaum throughout Galilee.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IV. 23-25.</cell><cell>CH. I. 35-39.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35 And in the morning, rising up a while before day, he went out
and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>36 And Simon, and they that were with him, followed after him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>37 And when they had found him, they said unto him, All <hi rend='italic'>men</hi>
seek for thee.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>38 And he said unto them, Let us
go into the next towns, that I may
preach there also: for therefore came I forth.</cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and
preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness,
and all manner of disease among the people.</cell><cell>39 And he preached in their synagogues
throughout all Galilee, and cast out devils.</cell></row>
<row><cell>24 And his fame went throughout
all Syria: and they brought unto him
all sick people that were taken with
divers diseases and torments, and those
which were possessed with devils, and
those which were lunatic, and those
that had the palsy; and he healed
them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And there followed him great
multitudes of people from Galilee, and
<hi rend='italic'>from</hi> Decapolis, and <hi rend='italic'>from</hi> Jerusalem,
and <hi rend='italic'>from</hi> Judea, and <hi rend='italic'>from</hi> beyond
Jordan.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IV. 42-44.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 And when it was day,<note place='foot'>This clause may be rendered <q>when the day was
coming on,</q> and thus be reconciled with the words of Mark, who says it was a great while
before day, namely, before broad day-light. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Scott</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>in
loc</hi></note> he departed,
and went into a desert place; and the people sought him, and came
unto him, and stayed him, that he
should not depart from them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 And he said unto them, I must
preach the kingdom of God to other
cities also, for therefore am I sent.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 And he preached in the synagogues of Galilee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>

<div>
<head>§ 33. The healing of a leper. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee.</hi></head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VIII. 2-4.</cell><cell>CH. I. 40-45.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And behold, there came a leper and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if
thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.</cell><cell>40 And there came a leper to him,
beseeching him, and kneeling down to him, and saying unto him, If thou wilt,
thou canst make me clean.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And Jesus put forth <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> hand, and
touched him, saying, I will; be thou
clean. And immediately his leprosy
was cleansed.</cell><cell>41 And Jesus, moved with compassion,
put forth <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> hand, and
touched him, and saith unto him, I
will; be thou clean.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>42 And as soon as he had spoken,
immediately the leprosy departed from
him, and he was cleansed.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And Jesus saith unto him, See
thou tell no man:<note place='foot'><q>The miraculous cure of the leprosy was thought by
the Jews to be characteristic of the Messiah; and therefore there was peculiar reason
for enjoining this man silence.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Benson's Life of Christ</hi>, p. 340. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>. For
the consequences of a premature full manifestation of himself as the Messiah, by
awakening the jealousy of the Roman government, might, humanly speaking, have
impeded his ministry. Yet there was great propriety in the private exhibition, to the
priesthood, of full proof that he was the Messiah; after which, their obstinacy in
rejecting him was inexcusable. In this, and divers other instances, our Lord manifested his intent not to be generally known to the Jews as their Messiah, till the consummation
of his ministry. A general announcement of his divine character at the
outset would have been productive of no good; on the contrary it would have excited
the malice of the Scribes, Pharisees and Herodians against him; would have favoured
the conceit of the Jews that he was to be their temporal king; would have awakened
the jealousy of the Roman government; and in the natural course of things, would
have prevented him from giving the many miraculous proofs which he gave of his ministry,
and thus laying solid foundations for faith in his divine mission; would have
exposed him and his religion to the charge of ostentation, vanity, and love of power
and display; and would have deprived the world of that example which he gave, of
meekness, humility and patient suffering and self-denial. According to human experience,
an early assumption of regal splendour, supported by the miracles he wrought,
would have been successful, and carried him to the throne instead of the cross; but it
would have deprived the world of the great object of his mission. A sufficient number
were enlightened to attest his miracles and proclaim his religion, and enough were left in
their ignorance, to condemn and crucify him. See <hi rend='smallcaps'>A. Clarke</hi>, and <hi rend='smallcaps'>Scott</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>in loc</hi>.</note> but go thy way,
shew thyself to the priest, and offer
the gift that Moses commanded, for a
testimony unto them.<note place='foot'>Lev. xiv. 2, seq.</note></cell><cell>43 And he straitly charged him,
and forthwith sent him away;</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>44 And saith unto him, See thou
say nothing to any man; but go thy
way, shew thyself to the priest, and
offer for thy cleansing those things
which Moses commanded, for a testimony
unto them.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>45 But he went out, and began to
publish it much, and to blaze abroad
the matter, insomuch that Jesus could
no more openly enter into the city,
but was without in desert places:
and they came to him from every
quarter.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. V. 12-16.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And it came to pass, when he
was in a certain city, behold, a man
full of leprosy: who, seeing Jesus,
fell on <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> face, and besought him,
saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst
make me clean.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And he put forth his hand and
touched him, saying, I will: Be thou
clean. And immediately the leprosy
departed from him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And he charged him to tell no
man: but go, and shew thyself to the
priest, and offer for thy cleansing, according
as Moses commanded, for a
testimony unto them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 But so much the more went
there a fame abroad of him: and great
multitudes came together to hear and
to be healed by him of their infirmities.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And he withdrew himself into
the wilderness, and prayed.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>

<div>
<head>§ 34. The healing of a paralytic. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX. 2-8.</cell><cell>CH. II. 1-12.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>And again he entered into Capernaum,
after some days; and it was noised that he was in the house.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2 And straightway many were
gathered together, insomuch that there was
no room to receive <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>, no, not
so much as about the door: and he preached the word unto them.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And behold, they brought to him
a man sick of the palsy, lying on a
bed: and Jesus, seeing their faith, said
unto the sick of the palsy, Son, be
of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven
thee.</cell><cell>3 And they come unto him, bringing
one sick of the palsy, which was borne of four.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>4 And when they could not come
nigh unto him for the press, they uncovered the roof where he was:
and when they had broken <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> up, they
let down the bed wherein the sick of the palsy lay.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5 When Jesus saw their faith, he
said unto the sick of the palsy, Son, thy sins be forgiven thee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And behold, certain of the scribes
said within themselves, This <hi rend='italic'>man</hi>
blasphemeth.</cell><cell>6 But there were certain of the
scribes sitting there, and reasoning in  their hearts,</cell></row>
<row><cell>7 Why doth this man thus speak
blasphemies? who can forgive sins but God only?</cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said, Wherefore think ye
evil in your hearts?</cell><cell>8 And immediately, when Jesus
perceived in his spirit, that they so
reasoned within themselves, he said unto them, Why reason ye these
things in your hearts?</cell></row>
<row><cell>5 For whether is easier to say,
<hi rend='italic'>Thy</hi> sins be forgiven thee; or to say,
Arise, and walk?</cell><cell>9 Whether is it easier to say to the
sick of the palsy, <hi rend='italic'>Thy</hi> sins be forgiven
thee; or to say, Arise, and take up thy bed, and walk?</cell></row>
<row><cell>6 But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to
forgive sins, (then saith he to the sick of the palsy,) Arise, take up thy bed,
and go unto thy house.</cell><cell>10 But that ye may know that the
Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins (he saith to the sick of
the palsy,)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And he arose, and departed to his house.</cell><cell>11 I say unto thee, Arise, and take
up thy bed, and go thy way into thy house.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8 But when the multitude saw <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>,
they marvelled, and glorified God,
which had given such power unto men.</cell><cell>12 And immediately he arose, took
up the bed, and went forth before them
all; insomuch that they were all
amazed, and glorified God, saying,
We never saw it on this fashion.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. V. 17-26.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And it came to pass on a certain
day, as he was teaching, that there
were Pharisees and doctors of the law
sitting by, which were come out of
every town of Galilee, and Judea, and
Jerusalem: and the power of the
Lord was <hi rend='italic'>present</hi> to heal them.</cell></row>
<row><cell>18 And behold, men brought in a
bed a man which was taken with a
palsy: and they sought <hi rend='italic'>means</hi> to
bring him in, and to lay <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> before
him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And when they could not find
by what way they might bring him
in, because of the multitude, they
went upon the house-top, and let him
down through the tiling with <hi rend='italic'>his</hi>
couch, into the midst before Jesus.</cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And when he saw their faith, he
said unto him, Man, thy sins are forgiven
thee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And the scribes and the Pharisees
began to reason, saying, Who is
this which speaketh blasphemies?
Who can forgive sins but God alone?</cell></row>
<row><cell>22 But when Jesus perceived their
thoughts, he, answering, said unto
them, What reason ye in your hearts?</cell></row>
<row><cell>23 Whether is easier, to say, Thy
sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Rise
up and walk?</cell></row>
<row><cell>24 But that ye may know that the
Son of man hath power upon earth to
forgive sins, (he said unto the sick of the
palsy,) I say unto thee, Arise, and take
up thy couch, and go unto thine house.</cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And immediately he arose up
before them, and took up that whereon
he lay, and departed to his own
house, glorifying God.</cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And they were all amazed, and
they glorified God, and were filled with
fear, saying, We have seen strange
things to-day.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>

<div>
<head>§ 35. The call of Matthew. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX. 9.</cell><cell>CH. II. 13, 14.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And as Jesus passed forth from thence, he saw a man named Matthew,
sitting at the receipt of custom: and he saith unto him, Follow me. And
he arose, and followed him.</cell><cell>13 And he went forth again by the
sea-side; and all the multitude resorted
unto him, and he taught them.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14 And as he passed by, he saw
Levi<note place='foot'>When a Jew became a Roman citizen, he usually assumed a
Roman name. It is therefore supposed that Levi was the original Hebrew, and
Matthew the assumed Roman name of this evangelist. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Stowe's</hi> Introd. 120. See also,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Harmer's</hi> Obs. vol. iv. p. 330; Obs. 94.</note> the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Alpheus, sitting at the
receipt of custom, and said unto him,
Follow me. And he arose, and followed him.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. V. 27, 28.</cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And after these things he went
forth, and saw a publican named Levi,
sitting at the receipt of custom: and
he said unto him, Follow me.</cell></row>
<row><cell>28 And he left all, rose up, and
followed him.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part IV. Our Lord's Second Passover, And The Subsequent Transactions
Until The Third.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Time.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>One year</hi>.
</p>

<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>

<div>
<head>§ 36. The pool of Bethesda; the healing of the infirm man;
and our Lord's subsequent discourse. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. V. 1-47.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>After this there was a feast of the
Jews: and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 Now there is at Jerusalem, by
the sheep <hi rend='italic'>market</hi>, a pool, which is
called in the Hebrew tongue, Bethesda,<note place='foot'>It
is observable that though John speaks of this pool or bath as
existing at the time he wrote, which was upwards of sixty years after the crucifixion, yet
he speaks of the efficacy of its waters in the past tense, as something which had long
ceased. This may account for the silence of Josephus concerning it; whether we suppose
it to have been really a miraculous virtue, existing only in the time of our Saviour; or
merely a groundless belief of the populace.</note>
having five porches.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 In these lay a great multitude of
impotent folk, of blind, halt, withered,
waiting for the moving of the water.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 For an angel went down at a certain
season into the pool, and troubled
the water: whosoever then first after
the troubling of the water stepped in,
was made whole of whatsoever disease
he had.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And a certain man was there,
which had an infirmity thirty and eight
years.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 When Jesus saw him lie, and
knew that he had been now a long
time <hi rend='italic'>in that case</hi>, he saith unto him,
Wilt thou be made whole?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 The impotent man answered him,
Sir, I have no man, when the water
is troubled, to put me into the pool:
but while I am coming, another steppeth
down before me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 Jesus saith unto him, Rise, take
up thy bed, and walk.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And immediately the man was
made whole, and took up his bed, and
walked: and on the same day was the
sabbath.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 The Jews therefore said unto him
that was cured, It is the sabbath-day;
it is not lawful for thee to carry <hi rend='italic'>thy</hi> bed.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 He answered them, He that
made me whole, the same said unto
me, Take up thy bed, and walk.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 Then asked they him, What
man is that which said unto thee,
Take up thy bed, and walk?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And he that was healed wist not
who it was: for Jesus had conveyed
himself away, a multitude being in
<hi rend='italic'>that</hi> place.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 Afterward Jesus findeth him in
the temple, and said unto him, Behold,
thou art made whole; sin no more,
lest a worse thing come unto thee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 The man departed, and told the
Jews that it was Jesus which had
made him whole.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And therefore did the Jews persecute
Jesus, and sought to slay him,
because he had done things things on
the sabbath-day.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 But Jesus answered them, My
Father worketh hitherto, and I work.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 Therefore the Jews sought the
more to kill him, because he not only
had broken the sabbath, but said also,
hat God was his Father, making himself
equal with God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 Then answered Jesus, and said
unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto
you, The Son can do nothing of himself,
but what he seeth the Father do:
for what things soever he doeth, these
also doeth the Son likewise.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 For the Father loveth the Son,
and sheweth him all things that himself
doeth: and he will shew him
greater works than these, that ye may
marvel.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 For as the Father raiseth up
the dead, and quickeneth <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>; even
so the Son quickeneth whom he will.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 For the Father judgeth no man;
but hath committed all judgment unto
the Son:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 That all <hi rend='italic'>men</hi> should honour the
Son, even as they honour the Father.
He that honoureth not the Son, honoureth
not the Father which has sent him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 Verily, verily, I say unto you,
He that heareth my word, and believeth
on him that sent me, hath everlasting
life, and shall not come into
condemnation; but is passed from
death into life.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 Verily, verily, I say unto you,
The hour is coming, and now is, when
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God: and they that hear shall live.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 For as the Father hath life in
himself, so hath he given to the Son
to have life in himself;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And hath given him authority to
execute judgment also, because he is
the Son of man.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 Marvel not at this: for the hour
is coming, in the which all that are in
the graves shall hear his voice,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And shall come forth; they that
have done good, unto the resurrection
of life; and they that have done evil,
unto the resurrection of damnation.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 I can of mine own self do
nothing: as I hear, I judge: and my
judgment is just; because I seek not
mine own will, but the will of the
Father which hath sent me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 If I bear witness of myself, my
witness is not true.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 There is another that beareth
witness of me, and I know that the
witness which he witnesseth of me is
true.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 Ye sent unto John, and he bare
witness unto the truth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 But I receive not testimony from
man: but these things I say, that ye
might be saved.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 He was a burning and a shining
light: and ye were willing for a season
to rejoice in his light.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36. But I have greater witness than
that of John: for the works which
the Father hath given me to finish, the
same works that I do, bear witness
of me, that the Father hath sent me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 And the Father himself which
hath sent me, hath borne witness of
me. Ye have neither heard his voice<note place='foot'>Spanheim,
dub. evang. ii. 185, doubts how the latter
part of this verse is reconcilable with Matthew iii. 17, and the parallel verses. But the
voice from heaven was not God's <emph>immediate</emph> voice; but uttered at his command, and in
his person. See Deut. iv. 33; Ex. xx. 1, 2; Comp. Hebr. ii. 2; Gal. iii. 19; Acts vii.
53. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note>
at any time, nor seen his shape.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 And ye have not his word abiding
in you: for whom he hath sent,
him ye believe not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 Search the scriptures; for in
them ye think ye have eternal life:
And they are they which testify of me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 And ye will not come to me,
that ye might have life.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 I receive not honour from men.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 But I know you, that ye have
not the love of God in you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 I am come in my Father's name,
and ye receive me not: if another
shall come in his own name, him ye
will receive.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 How can ye believe, which receive
honour one of another, and seek
not the honour that <hi rend='italic'>cometh</hi> from God
only?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 Do not think that I will accuse
you to the Father: there is <hi rend='italic'>one</hi> that
accuseth you, <hi rend='italic'>even Moses</hi>, in whom ye
trust.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46 For had ye believed Moses, ye
would have believed me: for he wrote
of me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>47 But if ye believe not his
writings, how shall ye believe my
words?</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>

<div>
<head>§ 37. The disciples pluck ears of grain
on the Sabbath. <hi rend='italic'>On the way to Galilee?</hi></head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XII. 1-8.</cell><cell>CH. II. 23-28.</cell></row>
<row><cell>At that time Jesus went on the sabbath-day through the corn, and his
disciples were a hungered, and began to pluck the ears of corn, and to
eat.<note place='foot'>Deut. xxiii. 25.</note></cell><cell>23 And it came to pass, that he
went through the corn-fields on the sabbath-day; and his disciples began,
as they went, to pluck the ears of Corn.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 But when the Pharisees saw <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>,
they said unto him, Behold, thy disciples
do that which is not lawful to
do upon the sabbath-day.<note place='foot'>The act of plucking the ears of corn by
the hand, in another's field, was expressly permitted, by the law of Moses, Deut. xxiii.
23; but it was considered so far a species of reaping as to be servile work, and therefore
not lawful to be done on the Sabbath. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Campbell</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>in loc</hi>. See <hi rend='smallcaps'>Robinson's</hi> Biblical
Researches in Palestine, Vol. 2, pp. 192, 201, that this custom is still in
use.</note></cell><cell>24 And the Pharisees said unto him,
Behold, why do they on the sabbath-day
that which is not lawful?</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 But he said unto them, Have ye
not read what David did when he was
a hungered, and they that were with him;</cell><cell>25 And he said unto them, Have
ye never read what David did,<note place='foot'>Hos. vi. 6.</note> when
he had need, and was a hungered, he
and they that were with him?</cell></row>
<row><cell>4 How he entered into the house of
God, and did eat the shew-bread,
which was not lawful for him to eat,
neither for them which were with him,
but only for the priests?</cell><cell>26 How he went into the house of
God, in the days of Abiathar<note place='foot'>It
appears from 1 Sam. xxi. 1, that Abimelech was the high
priest at the time referred to; but Abiathar his son was the <emph>chief</emph> priest under him, and
probably superintended the tabernacle and its stated concerns. Abimelech was soon after
slain; and Abiathar succeeded him in that office, and continued in it about forty years,
until after the death of David. This circumstance, and his great eminence, above his
father, may account for the use of his name rather than his father's, as illustrating the times
of David and Saul. See <hi rend='smallcaps'>Scott</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>in loc</hi>.</note> the high
priest, and did eat the shew-bread,
which is not lawful to eat, but for the
priests, and gave also to them which
were with him?</cell></row>
<row><cell>5 Or have ye not read in the law
how that on the sabbath-days the
priests in the temple profane the sabbath,
and are blameless?<note place='foot'>Numb. xxviii. 9, 10; xviii. 19.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 But I say unto you, that in this
place is <hi rend='italic'>one</hi> greater than the temple.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 But if ye had known what <hi rend='italic'>this</hi>
meaneth,<note place='foot'>1 Sam. xxi. 1-7.</note> I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice, ye would not have condemned
the guiltless.</cell><cell>27 And he said unto them, The
sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath:</cell></row>
<row><cell>8 For the Son of man is Lord even
of the sabbath-day.</cell><cell>28 Therefore, the Son of man is
Lord also of the sabbath.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VI. 1-5.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>And it came to pass on the second
sabbath after the first, that he went
through the corn-fields; and his disciples
plucked the ears of corn, and did
eat, rubbing <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> in <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> hands.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And certain of the Pharisees said
unto them, Why do ye that which is
not lawful to do on the sabbath-days?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And Jesus, answering them, said,
Have ye not read so much as this,
what David did, when himself was a
hungered, and they which were with
him;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 How he went into the house of
God, and did take and eat the shewbread,
and gave also to them that
were with him, which it is not lawful
to eat but for the priests alone?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And he said unto them, That the
Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>

<div>
<head>§ 38. The healing of the withered hand
on the Sabbath. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XII. 9-14.</cell><cell>CH. III. 1-6.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And when he was departed
thence, he went into their synagogue.</cell><cell>And he entered again into the synagogue;
and there was a man there which had a withered hand.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And behold, there was a man
which had <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> hand withered. And
they asked him, saying, Is it lawful
to heal on the sabbath-days? that
they might accuse him.</cell><cell>2 And they watched him, whether
he would heal him on the sabbath-day;
that they might accuse him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And he said unto them, What
man shall there be among you, that
shall have one sheep, and if it fall into
a pit on the sabbath-day, will he not
lay hold of it, and lift <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> out?</cell><cell>3 And he saith unto the man which
had the withered hand, Stand forth.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And he saith unto them, Is it
lawful to do good on the sabbath-days,
or to do evil? to save life, or to kill?
But they held their peace.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 How much then is a man better
than a sheep? wherefore it is lawful
to do well on the sabbath-days.</cell><cell>5 And when he had looked round
about on them with anger, being
grieved for the hardness of their
hearts, he saith unto the man, Stretch
forth thy hand. And he stretched
it out: and his hand was restored whole as the other.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13 Then saith he to the man,
Stretch forth thy hand. And he
stretched <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> forth; and <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> was restored
whole, like as the other.</cell><cell>6 And the Pharisees went forth,
and straightway took counsel with
the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VI. 6-11.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And it came to pass also on
another sabbath, that he entered into
the synagogue, and taught: and there
was a man whose right hand was
withered:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And the scribes and Pharisees
watched him, whether he would heal
on the sabbath-day; that they might
find an accusation against him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 But he knew their thoughts, and
said to the man which had the withered
hand, Rise up, and stand forth
in the midst. And he arose, and stood
forth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 Then said Jesus unto them, I will
ask you one thing; Is it lawful on the
sabbath-days to do good, or to do evil?
to save life, or to destroy <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And looking round about upon
them all, he said unto the man, Stretch
forth thy hand. And he did so: and
his hand was restored whole as the
other.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And they were filled with madness;
and communed one with another
what they might do to Jesus.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 39. Jesus arrives at the sea of Tiberias,
and is followed by multitudes. <hi rend='italic'>Lake of Galilee</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XII. 15-21.</cell><cell>CH. III. 7-12.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15 But when Jesus knew <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, he
withdrew himself from thence: and
great multitudes followed him, and
he healed them all.</cell><cell>7 But Jesus withdrew himself with
his disciples to the sea: and a great
multitude from Galilee followed him, and from Judea,</cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And charged them that they should not make him known:</cell><cell>8 And from Jerusalem, and from
Idumea, and <hi rend='italic'>from</hi> beyond Jordan; and
they about Tyre and Sidon, a great
multitude, when they had heard what
great things he did, came unto him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>17 That it might be fulfilled which
was spoken by Esaias the prophet,<note place='foot'>Is. xlii. 1, seq.; Is. xi. 10.</note>
saying,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 Behold my servant, whom I
have chosen; my beloved, in whom
my soul is well pleased: I will put
my Spirit upon him, and he shall
shew judgment to the Gentiles.</cell><cell>9 And he spake to his disciples,
that a small ship should wait on him,
because of the multitude, lest they
should throng him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 He shall not strive, nor cry;
neither shall any man hear his voice
in the streets.</cell><cell>10 For he had healed many; insomuch
that they pressed upon him for
to touch him, as many as had plagues.</cell></row>
<row><cell>20 A bruised reed shall he not
break, and smoking flax,<note place='foot'>There may be an allusion, in these words of the prophet,
to an Eastern custom, for those who were grievously afflicted to come to the sovereign
for relief or redress, having pots of fire, or of burning straw, or other combustible on their
heads, in token of their extreme trouble. Not one of these, the prophet seems to intimate,
should go away without redress; he will certainly remove the cause of their complaints,
and render truth and justice victorious over falsehood and oppression. 3 <hi rend='smallcaps'>Calm</hi>. 394.</note> shall he not
quench, till he send forth judgment
unto victory.</cell><cell>11 And unclean spirits, when they
saw him, fell down before him, and
cried, saying, Thou art the Son of God.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And in his name shall the Gentiles
trust.</cell><cell>12 And he straightly charged them,
that they should not make him known.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>

<div>
<head>§ 40. Jesus withdraws to the Mountain and chooses the Twelve;
multitudes follow him. <hi rend='italic'>Near Capernaum</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. X. 2-4.</cell><cell>CH. III. 13-19.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13 And he goeth up into a mountain,
and called <hi rend='italic'>unto him</hi> whom he would:
and they came unto him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14 And he ordained twelve, that
they should be with him, and that he
 might send them forth to preach.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15 And to have power to heal sicknesses,
and to cast out devils.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 Now the names of the twelve
apostles are these; The first, Simon,
who is called Peter, and Andrew his
brother; James <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Zebedee,
and John his brother;</cell><cell>16 And Simon he surnamed Peter.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17 And James the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Zebedee,
and John the brother of James, (and
he surnamed them Boanerges, which
is, The sons of thunder,)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 Philip, and Bartholomew; Thomas,
and Matthew the publican;<note place='foot'>It appears from Mark vi. 7, that the apostles were
sent forth by <hi rend='italic'>two and two</hi> to preach; and this accounts for their being here and in the
parallel places named in couples. Luke mentions Matthew first, as being regarded as the
senior of Thomas, his companion; but Matthew modestly places his own name last. Mark is
less observant of the order of the names, but he alone states that they were thus associated.
The others give the names in couples, but state no reason for it. This is not the method
of false witnesses; such incidental corroborations belong only to the narratives of truth.</note>
James <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Alpheus, and Lebbeus,<note place='foot'><p>Thaddeus, Theudas and Judas (or Jude) are probably names of
the same signification, the Greek termination being added to different forms of a Hebrew
verb. <q>The Canaanite,</q> Matth. x. 4, is the same with <q>Zelotes</q> in Luke. <q>Cognomen
erat Chald. quod Lucas reddidit Zelotem.</q> Wetstein. Thus, Thomas is rendered Didymus,
or, the twin; Cephas, Peter; and Silas, Tertius. Some suppose that this name had been
given to Simon on account of his religious zeal; or, because he had been of a Jewish
sect called Zealots, who were addicted to the Pharisees, and justified themselves by the
example of Phinehas, for punishing offenders without waiting for the sentence of the
magistrate. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.
</p>
<p>
<q>Between Matthew (x. 2,) and Mark (iii. 16,) we observe a strict correspondence, but
the catalogue in St. Luke (vi. 14,) differs from both the first-mentioned writers, in two
particulars. 1, <q>Simon the Canaanite,</q> of Matthew and Mark is introduced as <q>Simon
called Zelotes.</q> Now if any difference was admitted in this place, we might expect it to
extend no farther than to the order of the names, or the addition of a surname; as, for
instance, Matthew calls the <q>Thaddeus</q> of Mark also <q>Lebbeus;</q> but here we have one
surname changed for another. It is indeed easy to conceive, that Simon might have been
commonly distinguished by either appellative, but this we can only conjecture; neither
Evangelist adds a word to explain the point. 2, The other discrepancy, however, appears
more serious. The Lebbeus or Thaddeus of St. Matthew and Mark, is entirely omitted in
the list of St. Luke, who substitutes <q>Judas the brother of James.</q> Here is certainly a
marked difference, for it would not seem very probable, that the Apostle in question passed
by three distinct names. Nor could this be a mere oversight in St. Luke, for, in Acts i. 13,
where a catalogue of the eleven is inserted, he mentioned this individual in exactly the same
manner. Are we to suppose then that the Evangelist commits a deliberate error in this
particular? We have distinct and satisfactory witnesses to prove that there really was an
Apostle, besides Iscariot, who bore the name of Judas. Both Matthew (xiii. 55,) and Mark
(vi. 3,) concur in speaking of James and Jude as the near relations of Christ, and part of
this statement is incidentally confirmed by St. Paul, who calls James <q>the Lord's brother.</q>
(Gal. i. 19.) But farther, St. John (xiv. 22,) presents us with a remark made by <q>Judas
not Iscariot;</q> evidently one of the Apostles; and St. Jude himself, in the first verse of
his Epistle, styles himself <q>the brother of James.</q> There is thus amply sufficient
evidence, that all the Gospel writers acknowledge an Apostle of this name, though St.
Matthew, with his usual simplicity, familiarly mentions him by two of his appellations,
omitting that of Judas, and St. Mark sees no occasion to depart from his language, in a
matter of such general notoriety. Luke, on the other hand, usually studious of accuracy,
distinguishes this Apostle by the name generally current in the Church, when his Gospel
was written. This variation then may, upon the whole, convince us how undesignedly
the writers of Scripture confirm each other's statements; yet can this only be the result of
a minute examination upon our part, and upon the probability of this, a cautious writer
would hardly stake his reputation for truth or exactness.</q> See <hi rend='smallcaps'>Roberts's</hi> <q>Light shining
out of Darkness,</q> pp. 91-93.</p></note>
whose surname was Thaddeus;</cell><cell>18 And Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew,
and James the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Alpheus, and
Thaddeus, and Simon the Canaanite,</cell></row>
<row><cell>4 Simon the Canaanite, and Judas
Iscariot, who also betrayed him.</cell><cell>19 And Judas Iscariot, which also
betrayed him: and they went into a house.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VI. 12-19.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And it came to pass in those
days, that he went out into a mountain
to pray, and continued all night in
prayer to God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And when it was day, he called
<hi rend='italic'>unto him</hi> his disciples: and of them
he chose twelve, whom also he named
Apostles;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 Simon (whom he also named
Peter) and Andrew his brother, James
and John, Philip and Bartholomew,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 Matthew and Thomas, James
the <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Alpheus, and Simon called
Zelotes,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And Judas <hi rend='italic'>the brother</hi> of James,
and Judas Iscariot, which also was
the traitor.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And he came down with them,
and stood in the plain; and the company
of his disciples, and a great
multitude of people out of all Judea
and Jerusalem, and from the sea-coast
of Tyre and Sidon, which came to
hear him, and to be healed of their
diseases;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 And they that were vexed with
unclean spirits: and they were healed.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And the whole multitude sought
to touch him; for there went virtue
out of him, and healed <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> all.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>

<div>
<head>§ 41. The Sermon on the Mount. <hi rend='italic'>Near Capernaum</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Luke.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. V. VI. VII. VIII. 1.</cell><cell>CH. VI. 20-49.</cell></row>
<row><cell>And seeing the multitudes, he went
up into a mountain: and when he was
set, his disciples came unto him.<note place='foot'><p>It may be objected that Matthew, in saying that this
discourse was delivered sitting on a mountain, is contradicted by Luke, who says, that
Jesus was standing on a plain. Luke vi. 17. But Dr. Clarke, on this latter place,
has suggested that Jesus <q>being pressed with great multitudes of people, might retire
from them again to the top of the hill.</q> And Dr. Priestley observes that <q>Matthew's
saying that Jesus was <hi rend='italic'>sat down</hi> after he had gone up the mountain, and Luke's saying
that he stood on the plain, when he healed the sick before the discourse, are no inconsistencies.</q>
Harm. p. 83.
</p>
<p>
The whole picture is striking. Jesus ascends a mountain, employs the night in prayer,
and having thus solemnly invoked the divine blessing, authoritatively separates the twelve
apostles from the mass of his disciples. He descends, and heals, in the plain, all among a
great multitude, collected from various parts by the fame of his miraculous power. Having
thus created attention, he satisfies the desire of the people to hear his doctrine; and retiring
first to the mountain whence he came, that his attentive hearers might follow him, and
might better arrange themselves before him. Sacro digna silentio Mirantur <hi rend='italic'>omnes</hi> dicere.
<hi rend='italic'>Hor</hi>. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.
</p>
<p>
The different accounts of the Sermon on the Mount may be reconciled, by considering
that Mathew wrote chiefly for the Hebrew Christians; and it was therefore important for
him to bring out, in full, the manner in which our Lord enforced the spiritual nature of
his dispensation and doctrine, in opposition to the mere letter of the Jewish law, and the
teaching and practice of Scribes and Pharisees; which he does particularly and with many
examples; while Luke, on the contrary, wrote chiefly for Gentile Christians, to whom the
contrast with the Jewish law was of less interest; and therefore he omits those parts of
the discourse, and dwells only upon those which were of practical importance to all.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Robinson</hi>. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</p></note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And he opened his mouth, and
taught them, saying,</cell><cell>20 And he lifted up his eyes on his
disciples, and said, Blessed <hi rend='italic'>be ye</hi> poor;
for yours is the kingdom of God.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 Blessed <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> the poor in spirit:
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.</cell><cell>21 Blessed <hi rend='italic'>are ye</hi> that hunger now:
for ye shall be filled. Blessed <hi rend='italic'>are ye</hi>
that weep now: for ye shall laugh.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4 Blessed <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> they that mourn:
for they shall be comforted.</cell><cell>22 Blessed are ye when men shall
hate you, and when they shall separate
you <hi rend='italic'>from their company</hi>, and
shall reproach <hi rend='italic'>you</hi>, and cast out your
name as evil, for the Son of man's sake.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5 Blessed <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> the meek: for they
shall inherit the earth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 Blessed <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> they which do hunger
and thirst after righteousness: for
they shall be filled.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 Blessed <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> the merciful: for
they shall obtain mercy.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 Blessed <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> the pure in heart: for
they shall see God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 Blessed <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> the peace-makers:
for they shall be called the children
of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 Blessed <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> they which are persecuted
for righteousness' sake: for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 Blessed <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> ye when <hi rend='italic'>men</hi> shall
revile you, and persecute <hi rend='italic'>you</hi>, and
shall say all manner of evil against
you falsely, for my sake.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 Rejoice, and be exceeding glad:
for great <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> your reward in heaven:
for so persecuted they the prophets
which were before you.</cell><cell>23 Rejoice ye in that day, and leap
for joy: for behold, your reward <hi rend='italic'>is</hi>
great in heaven: for in the like manner
did their fathers unto the prophets.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>24 But wo unto you that are rich!
for ye have received your consolation.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>25 Wo unto you that are full! for
ye shall hunger. Wo unto you that
laugh now! for ye shall mourn and
weep.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>26 Wo unto you, when all men
shall speak well of you! for so did
their fathers to the false prophets.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13 Ye are the salt of the earth: but
if the salt have lost his savour, wherewith
shall it be salted? it is thenceforth
good for nothing, but to be cast
out, and to be trodden under foot of
men.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 Ye are the light of the world.
A city that is set on a hill cannot be
hid.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 Neither do men light a candle,
and put it under a bushel, but on a
candlestick: and it giveth light unto
all that are in the house.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 let your light so shine before
men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which
is in heaven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 Think not that I am come to
destroy the law, or the prophets: I
am not come to destroy, but to fulfil.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 For verily, I say unto you, Till
heaven and earth pass, one jot or one
tittle shall in no wise pass from the
law, till all be fulfilled.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 Whosoever therefore shall break
one of these least commandments, and
shall teach men so, he shall be called
the least in the kingdom of heaven:
but whosoever shall do, and teach
<hi rend='italic'>them</hi>, the same shall be called great
in the kingdom of heaven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 For I say unto you, That except
your righteousness shall exceed
<hi rend='italic'>the righteousness</hi> of the scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter
into the kingdom of heaven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 Ye have heard that it was said
by them of old time, Thou shalt not
kill; and whosoever shall kill, shall
be in danger of the judgment:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 But I say unto you, That whosoever
is angry with his brother, without
a cause, shall be in danger of the
judgment: and whosoever shall say
to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger
of the council: but whosoever shall
say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of
hell-fire.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 Therefore, if thou bring thy gift
to the altar, and there rememberest
that thy brother hath aught against
thee,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 Leave there thy gift before the
altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come
and offer thy gift.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 Agree with thine adversary
quickly, while thou art in the way
with him; lest at any time the adversary
deliver thee to the judge, and
the judge deliver thee to the officer,
and thou be cast into prison.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 Verily, I say unto thee, Thou
shall by no means come out thence, till
thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 Ye have heard that it was said
by them of old time, Thou shalt not
commit adultery:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 But I say unto you, That whosoever
looketh on a woman to lust after
her, hath committed adultery with her
already in his heart.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And if thy right eye offend thee,
pluck it out, and cast <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> from thee:
for it is profitable for thee that one of
thy members should perish, and not
<hi rend='italic'>that</hi> thy whole body should be cast
into hell.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And if thy right hand offend
thee, cut it off, and cast <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> from thee:
for it is profitable for thee that one of
thy members should perish, and not
<hi rend='italic'>that</hi> thy whole body should be cast
into hell.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 It hath been said, Whosoever
shall put away his wife, let him give
her a writing of divorcement:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 But I say unto you, That whosoever
shall put away his wife, saving
for the cause of fornication, causeth
her to commit adultery: and whosoever
shall marry her that is divorced,
committeth adultery.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 Again, ye have heard that it
hath been said by them of old time,
Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but
shalt perform unto the Lord thine
oaths:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 But I say unto you, Swear not at
all: neither by heaven; for it is God's
throne:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 Nor by the earth; for it is his
footstool: neither by Jerusalem; for
it is the city of the great King:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 Neither shalt thou swear by thy
head; because thou canst not make
one hair white or black.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 But let your communication be,
Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever
<hi rend='italic'>is</hi> more than these cometh of evil.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 Ye have heard that it hath been
said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth
for a tooth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 But I say unto you, That ye
resist not evil: but whosoever shall
smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to
him the other also.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 And if any man will sue thee at
the law, and take away thy coat, let
him have <hi rend='italic'>thy</hi> cloak also.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 And whosoever shall compel
thee<note place='foot'>The Greek word here employed is said to be derived
from the Persians, among whom the king's messengers or posts were called <hi rend='italic'>Angari</hi>. These
had the royal authority for pressing horses, ships, and even men, to assist them in the
business on which they were sent. The word therefore signifies, to be compelled by
violence to do any particular service, especially of the public kind, by the king's authority.
And the sentiment is a lesson of patience and gentleness under severe exactions from
man. <hi rend='italic'>Lightfoot, apud</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>A. Clarke</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>in loc</hi>. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Sir J. Chardin's</hi> Travels, Vol. i. p. 238,
257.</note> to go a mile, go with him twain.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 Give to him that asketh thee,
and from him that would borrow of
thee, turn not thou away.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 Ye have heard that it hath been
said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour,
and hate thine enemy:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 But I say unto you, Love your
enemies, bless them that curse you,
do good to them that hate you, and
pray for them which despitefully use
you, and persecute you;</cell><cell>27 But I say unto you which hear,
Love your enemies, do good to them
which hate you,</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>28 Bless them that curse you, and
pray for them which despitefully use
you.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>29 And unto him that smiteth thee
on the <hi rend='italic'>one cheek</hi>, offer also the other;
and him that taketh away thy cloak,
forbid not <hi rend='italic'>to take thy</hi> coat also.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>30 Give to every man that asketh
of thee; and of him that taketh away
thy goods ask <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> not again.</cell></row>
<row><cell>45 That ye may be the children of
your Father which is in heaven: for
he maketh his sun to rise on the evil
and on the good, and sendeth rain on
the just and on the unjust.</cell><cell>31 And as ye would that men
should do to you, do ye also to them
likewise.</cell></row>
<row><cell>46 For if ye love them which love
you, what reward have ye? do not
even the publicans the same?</cell><cell>32 For if ye love them which love
you, what thank have ye? for sinners
also love those that love them.</cell></row>
<row><cell>47 And if ye salute your brethren
only, what do ye more <hi rend='italic'>than others</hi>?
do not even the publicans so?</cell><cell>33 And if ye do good to them
which do good to you, what thank
have ye? for sinners also do even the
same.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>34 And if ye lend <hi rend='italic'>to them</hi> of whom
ye hope to receive, what thank have
ye? for sinners also lend to sinners,
to receive as much again.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35 But love ye your enemies, and
do good, and lend, hoping for nothing
again; and your reward shall be great,
and ye shall be the children of the
Highest: for he is kind unto the unthankful
and <hi rend='italic'>to</hi> the evil.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>36 Be ye therefore merciful, as your
Father also is merciful.</cell></row>
<row><cell>48 Be ye therefore perfect, even as
your Father which is in heaven is
perfect.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VI.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Take heed that ye do not your
alms before men, to be seen of them:
otherwise ye have no reward of your
Father which is in heaven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 Therefore, when thou doest <hi rend='italic'>thine</hi>
alms, do not sound a trumpet before
thee, as the hypocrites do, in the synagogues,
and in the streets, that they
may have glory of men. Verily, I say
unto you, They have their reward.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 But when thou doest alms, let not
thy left hand know what thy right
hand doeth;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 That thine alms may be in secret:
and thy Father which seeth in secret,
himself shall reward thee openly.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And when thou prayest, thou shalt
not be as the hypocrites <hi rend='italic'>are</hi>; for they
love to pray standing in the synagogues,
and in the corners of the streets,
that they may be seen of men. Verily,
I say unto you, They have their reward.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 But thou, when thou prayest,
enter into thy closet, and when thou
hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father
which is in secret; and thy Father,
which seeth in secret, shall reward
thee openly.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 But when ye pray, use not vain
repetitions, as the heathen do: for they
think that they shall be heard for their
much speaking.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 Be not yet therefore like unto
them: for your Father knoweth what
things ye have need of before ye ask
him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 After this manner therefore pray
ye: Our Father which art in heaven,
Hallowed be thy name.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 Thy kingdom come. Thy will
be done in earth as <hi rend='italic'>it is</hi> in heaven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 Give us this day our daily bread.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And forgive us our debts, as we
forgive our debtors.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And lead us not into temptation,
but deliver us from evil. For thine is
the kingdom, and the power, and the
glory, for ever. Amen.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 For, if ye forgive men their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will
also forgive you:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 But, if ye forgive not men their
trespasses, neither will your Father
forgive your trespasses.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 Moreover, when ye fast, be not
as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance:
for they disfigure their faces, that they
may appear unto men to fast. Verily,
I say unto you, They have their reward.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 But thou, when thou fastest,
anoint thy head, and wash thy face;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 That thou appear not unto men
to fast, but unto thy Father, which
is in secret: and thy Father, which
seeth in secret, shall reward thee
openly.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 Lay not up for yourselves treasures
upon earth, where moth and rust
doth corrupt, and where thieves break
through and steal:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 But lay up for yourselves treasures
in heaven, where neither moth
nor rust doth corrupt, and where
thieves do not break through nor steal.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 For where your treasure is, there
will your heart be also.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 The light of the body is the eye:
if therefore thine eye be single, thy
whole body shall be full of light.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 But if thine eye be evil, thy
whole body shall be full of darkness.
If therefore the light that is in thee
be darkness, how great <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> that darkness!</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 No man can serve two masters:
for either he will hate the one, and
love the other; or else he will hold to
the one, and despise the other. Ye
cannot serve God and mammon.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 Therefore I say unto you, Take
no thought for your life, what ye shall
eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet
for your body, what ye shall put on.
Is not the life more than meat, and
the body than raiment?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 Behold the fowls of the air: for
they sow not, neither do they reap, nor
gather into barns; yet your heavenly
Father feedeth them. Are ye not much
better than they?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 Which of you by taking thought
can add one cubit unto his stature?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 And why take ye thought for
raiment? Consider the lilies of the
field how they grow; they toil not,
neither do they spin;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And yet I say unto you, That
even Solomon, in all his glory, was
not arrayed like one of these.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 Wherefore, if God so clothe the
grass of the field, which to-day is, and
to-morrow is cast into the oven, <hi rend='italic'>shall
he</hi> not much more <hi rend='italic'>clothe</hi> you, O ye of
little faith?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 Therefore take no thought, saying,
What shall we eat? or, what shall
we drink? or, wherewithal shall we
be clothed?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 (For after all these things do
the Gentiles seek) for your heavenly
Father knoweth that ye have need of
all these things.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 But seek ye first the kingdom of
God, and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be added unto you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 Take therefore no thought for
the morrow: for the morrow shall
take thought for the things of itself.
Sufficient unto the day <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> the evil
thereof.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VII.</cell><cell>CH. VI. 20-49.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Judge not, that ye be not judged.</cell><cell>37 Judge not, and ye shall not be
judged: condemn not, and ye shall
not be condemned: forgive, and ye
shall be forgiven:</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 For with what judgment ye judge,
ye shall be judged: and with what
measure ye mete, it shall be measured
to you again.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>38 Give, and it shall be given unto
you; good measure, pressed down, and
shaken together, and running over,
shall men give into your bosom. For
with the same measure that ye mete
withal, it shall be measured to you
again.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>39 And he spake a parable unto
them; Can the blind lead the blind?
shall they not both fall into the ditch?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>40 The disciple is not above his
master: but every one that is perfect,
shall be as his master.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And why beholdest thou the mote
that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest
not the beam that is in thine
own eye?</cell><cell>41 And why beholdest thou the
mote that is in thy brother's eye, but
perceivest not the beam that is in thine
own eye?</cell></row>
<row><cell>4 Or how wilt thou say to thy
brother, Let me pull out the mote out
of thine eye; and behold a beam <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> in
thine own eye?</cell><cell>42 Either how canst thou say to
thy brother, Brother, let me pull out
the mote that is in thine eye, when
thou thyself beholdest not the beam
that is in thine own eye? Thou
hypocrite, cast out first the beam out
of thine own eye, and then shalt thou
see clearly to pull out the mote that is
in thy brother's eye.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5 Thou hypocrite, first cast out the
beam out of thine own eye; and then
shalt thou see clearly to cast out the
mote out of thy brother's eye.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 Give not that which is holy unto
the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls
before swine, lest they trample them
under their feet, and turn again and
rend you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 Ask, and it shall be given you;
seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened unto you:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 For every one that asketh receiveth;
and he that seeketh, findeth;
and to him that knocketh, it shall be
opened.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 Or what man is there of you,
whom if his son ask bread, will he
give him a stone?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 Or if he ask a fish, will he give
him a serpent?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 If ye then being evil know how
to give good gifts unto your children,
how much more shall your Father
which is in heaven give good things
to them that ask him?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 Therefore all things whatsoever
ye would that men should do to you,
do ye even so to them: for this is the
law and the prophets.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 Enter ye in at the strait gate;
for wide <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> the gate, and broad <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> the
way, that leadeth to destruction, and
many there be which go in thereat:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 Because, strait <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> the gate, and
narrow <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> the way, which leadeth unto
life, and few there be that find it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 Beware of false prophets, which
come to you in sheep's clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening wolves.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 Ye shall know them by their
fruits: Do men gather grapes of thorns,
or figs of thistles?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 Even so every good tree bringeth
forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree
bringeth forth evil fruit.</cell><cell>43 For a good tree bringeth not forth
corrupt fruit; neither doth a corrupt
tree bring forth good fruit.</cell></row>
<row><cell>18 A good tree cannot bring forth
evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree
bring forth good fruit.</cell><cell>44 For every tree is known by his
own fruit: for of thorns men do not
gather figs, nor of a bramble-bush
gather they grapes.</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 Every tree that bringeth not
forth good fruit is hewn down, and
cast into the fire.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 Wherefore, by their fruits ye
shall know them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>45 A good man out of the good
treasure of his heart, bringeth forth
that which is good; and an evil man,
out of the evil treasure of his heart,
bringeth forth that which is evil: for
of the abundance of the heart his
mouth speaketh.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21 Not every one that saith unto
me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth
the will of my father which is in
heaven.</cell><cell>46 And why call ye me Lord,
Lord, and do not the things which I
say?</cell></row>
<row><cell>22 Many will say to me in that
day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied
in thy name? and in thy name
have cast out devils? and in thy name
done many wonderful works?</cell><cell>47 Whosoever cometh to me, and
heareth my sayings, and doeth them,
I will shew you to whom he is like.</cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And then will I profess unto
them, I never knew you: depart from
me, ye that work iniquity.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 Therefore, whosoever heareth
these sayings of mine, and doeth them,
I will liken him unto a wise man,
which built his house upon a rock:</cell><cell>48 He is like a man which built
a house, and digged deep, and laid
the foundation on a rock: and when
the flood arose, the stream beat vehemently
upon that house, and could not
shake it: for it was founded upon a
rock.</cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And the rain descended, and the
floods came, and the winds blew, and
beat upon that house, and it fell not:
for it was founded upon a rock:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And every one that heareth
these sayings of mine, and doeth them
not, shall be likened unto a foolish
man, which built his house upon the
sand:</cell><cell>49 But he that heareth and doeth
not, is like a man that without a foundation
built a house upon the earth, against which the stream did beat
vehemently, and immediately it fell,
and the ruin of that house was great.</cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And the rain descended, and the
floods came, and the winds blew, and
beat upon that house; and it fell: and
great was the fall of it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 And it came to pass when Jesus
had ended these sayings, the people
were astonished at his doctrine.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 For he taught them as <hi rend='italic'>one</hi>
having authority, and not as the
scribes.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VIII.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>When he was come down from the
mountain, great multitudes followed
him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>

<div>
<head>§ 42. The healing of the centurion's servant. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Luke.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VIII. 5-13.</cell><cell>CH. VII. 1-10.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And when Jesus was entered into
Capernaum, there came unto him<note place='foot'><p>Calvin says that Matthew, being more brief, introduces
the centurion himself as speaking; and that Luke expresses more at large his sending by
his friends; but that the sense of both is the same. <hi rend='italic'>Harm</hi>. p. 124.
</p>
<p>
(Toinard quotes Exod. xviii. 6, where the words related as spoken by Jethro, were
evidently a message sent by him to Moses. <hi rend='italic'>Harm</hi>. 147.)
Considering then the sameness of the scene, of the person, of the words, and of the
transaction, I cannot but conclude with Grotius, that the miracle is one and the same,
related in general by Matthew, and with greater accuracy by Luke. <hi rend='smallcaps'>newcome</hi>.</p></note> a
centurion, beseeching him,</cell><cell>Now, when he had ended all his
sayings in the audience of the people,
he entered into Capernaum,</cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And saying, Lord, my servant
lieth at home sick of the palsy, grievously
tormented.</cell><cell>2 And a certain centurion's servant,
who was dear unto him, was sick, and
ready to die.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>3 And when he heard of Jesus, he
sent unto him the elders of the Jews,
beseeching him that he would come
and heal his servant.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And Jesus saith unto him, I will
come and heal him.</cell><cell>4 And when they came to Jesus,
they besought him instantly, saying,
That he was worthy for whom he
should do this:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5 For he loveth our nation, and he
hath built us a synagogue.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8 The centurion answered and said,
Lord, I am not worthy that thou
shouldest come under my roof: but
speak the word only, and my servant
shall be healed.</cell><cell>6 Then Jesus went with them.
And when he was now not far from
the house, the centurion sent friends
to him, saying unto him, Lord, trouble
not thyself; for I am not worthy that
thou shouldest enter under my roof;</cell></row>
<row><cell>9 For I am a man under authority,
having soldiers under me: and I say
to this man, Go, and he goeth; and to
another, Come, and he cometh; and to
my servant, Do this, and he doeth <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>.</cell><cell>8 For I also am a man set under
authority, having under me soldiers,
and I say unto one, Go, and he goeth;
and to another, Come, and he cometh;
and to my servant, Do this, and he
doeth <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10 When Jesus heard <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, he marvelled,
and said to them that followed,
Verily, I say unto you, I have
not found so great faith, no, not in
Israel.</cell><cell>9 When Jesus heard these things,
he marvelled at him, and turned him
about and said unto the people that
followed him, I say unto you, I have
not found so great faith, no, not in
Israel.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And I say unto you, That many
shall come from the east and west,
and shall sit down with Abraham,
and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom
of heaven:</cell><cell>7 Wherefore neither thought I myself
worthy to come unto thee; but
say in a word, and my servant shall
be healed.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 But the children of the kingdom
shall be cast out into outer darkness:
there shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And Jesus said unto the centurion,
Go thy way; and as thou hast
believed, <hi rend='italic'>so</hi> be it done unto thee.
And his servant was healed in the
self-same hour.</cell><cell>10 And they that were sent, returning
to the house, found the servant
whole that had been sick.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>

<div>
<head>§ 43. The raising of the widow's son. <hi rend='italic'>Nain</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VII. 11-17.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And it came to pass the day
after, that he went into a city called
Nain: and many of his disciples went
with him, and much people.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 Now, when he came nigh to the
gate of the city, behold, there was a
dead man carried out, the only son of
his mother, and she was a widow:
and much people of the city was with
her.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And when the Lord saw her,
he had compassion on her, and said
unto her, Weep not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And he came and touched the
bier: and they that bare <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> stood
still. And he said, Young man, I say
unto thee, Arise.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And he that was dead sat up,
and began to speak: and he delivered
him to his mother.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And there came a fear on all:
and they glorified God, saying, That
a great prophet is risen up among us;
and, That God hath visited his people.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And this rumour of him went
forth throughout all Judea, and
throughout all the region round about.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 44. John the Baptist, in prison,
sends disciples to Jesus. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee. Capernaum?</hi></head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Luke</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XI. 2-19.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 Now when John had heard in the
prison the works of Christ, he sent
two of his disciples,</cell><cell>18 And the disciples of John
shewed him of all these things.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And said unto him. Art thou he
that should come,<note place='foot'>The nature of our Lord's ministry, as it now
appeared, so unlike what John as a Jew expected, may have surprised and perplexed
him. And his own misfortune, coming upon this disappointment and perplexity, would
increase his doubt and embarrassment. His faith was shaken;&mdash;the question implies no
more;&mdash;and he sent that his doubts might be removed, and his faith confirmed. Jesus
therefore merely referred John to the miracles he was doing, and the prophecies
which spake of him, and which were fulfilled by those miracles. Bp. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Sumner</hi>, in loc.</note> or do we look for
another?</cell><cell>19 And John calling <hi rend='italic'>unto him</hi> two
of his disciples, sent <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> to Jesus,
saying, Art thou he that should come?
or look we for another?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20 When the men were come unto
him, they said, John Baptist hath
sent us unto thee, saying, Art thou he
that should come? or look we for
another?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21 And in that same hour he cured
many of <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> infirmities, and plagues,
and of evil spirits; and unto many
<hi rend='italic'>that were</hi> blind he gave sight.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4 Jesus answered and said unto
them, Go and shew John again those
things which ye do hear and see:</cell><cell>22 Then Jesus answering, said unto
them, Go your way, and tell John
what things ye have seen and heard;
how that the blind see, the lame walk,
the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear,
the dead are raised, to the poor the
gospel is preached.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5 The blind receive their sight,
and the lame walk, the lepers are
cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead
are raised up, and the poor have the
gospel preached to them.<note place='foot'>Is. xxxv. 5, seq.</note></cell><cell>23 And blessed is <hi rend='italic'>he</hi>, whosoever
shall not be offended in me.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And blessed is <hi rend='italic'>he</hi> whosoever shall
not be offended in me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And as they departed, Jesus began
to say unto the multitudes concerning
John, What went ye out into the
wilderness to see? A reed shaken
with the wind?</cell><cell>24 And when the messengers of
John were departed, he began to speak
unto the people concerning John,
What went ye out into the wilderness
for to see? A reed shaken with the
wind?</cell></row>
<row><cell>8 But what went ye out for to see?
A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold,
they that wear soft <hi rend='italic'>clothing</hi> are
in kings' houses.</cell><cell>25 But what went ye out for to see?
A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold,
they which are gorgeously apparelled,
and live delicately, are in
kings' courts.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9 But what went ye out for to see?
A prophet? yea, I say unto you, and
more than a prophet.</cell><cell>26 But what went ye out for to see?
A prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and
much more than a prophet.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10 For this is he of whom it is written,<note place='foot'>Mal. iii. 1.</note>
Behold, I send my messenger
before thy face, which shall prepare
thy way before thee.</cell><cell>27 This is <hi rend='italic'>he</hi>, of whom it is written,
Behold, I send my messenger before
thy face, which shall prepare thy way
before thee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11 Verily, I say unto you, Among
them that are born of women, there
hath not risen a greater than John the
Baptist: notwithstanding, he that is
least in the kingdom of heaven, is
greater than he.</cell><cell>28 For I say unto you, Among
those that are born of women, there
is not a greater prophet than John the
Baptist: but he that is least in the
kingdom of God, is greater than he.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>29 And all the people that heard
him, and the publicans, justified God,
being baptized with the baptism of
John.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>30 But the Pharisees and lawyers
rejected the council of God against
themselves, being not baptized of him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And from the days of John the
Baptist, until now, the kingdom of
heaven suffereth violence, and the
violent take it by force.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 For all the prophets and the law
prophesied until John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And if ye will receive <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, this is
Elias which was for to come.<note place='foot'>Mal. iv. 5.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 He that hath ears to hear, let
him hear.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 But whereunto shall I liken this
generation? It is like unto children
sitting in the markets, and calling
unto their fellows.</cell><cell>31 And the Lord said, Whereunto
then shall I liken the men of this generation?
and to what are they like?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>32 They are like unto children sitting
in the market-place, and calling
one to another, and saying, We have
piped unto you, and ye have not
danced; we have mourned to you, and
ye have not wept.</cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And saying, We have piped
unto you, and ye have not danced;
we have mourned unto you, and ye
have not lamented.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 For John came neither eating
nor drinking, and they say, He hath a
devil.</cell><cell>33 For John the Baptist came neither
eating bread, nor drinking wine;
and ye say, He hath a devil.</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 The Son of man came eating
and drinking, and they say, Behold a
man gluttonous, and a wine-bibber, a
friend of publicans and sinners. But
Wisdom is justified of her children.</cell><cell>34 The Son of man is come eating
and drinking; and ye say, Behold a
gluttonous man, and a wine-bibber, a
friend of publicans and sinners!</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35 But Wisdom is justified of all
her children.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>

<div>
<head>§ 45. Reflections of Jesus
on appealing to his mighty works. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XI. 20-30.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 Then began he to upbraid the
cities wherein most of his mighty
works were done, because they repented
not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 Wo unto thee, Chorazin! wo
unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the
mighty works which were done in you
had been done in Tyre and Sidon,
they would have repented long ago in
sackcloth and ashes.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 But I say unto you, It shall
be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon
at the day of judgment, than for
you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And thou, Capernaum, which
art exalted unto heaven, shalt be
brought down to hell: for if the
mighty works which have been done
in thee, had been done in Sodom, it
would have remained until this day.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 But I say unto you, That it
shall be more tolerable for the land of
Sodom, in the day of judgment, than
for thee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 At that time Jesus answered
and said, I thank thee, O Father,
Lord of heaven and earth, because
thou hast hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and hast revealed
them unto babes.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 Even so, Father, for so it
seemed good in thy sight.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 All things are delivered unto me
of my Father; and no man knoweth
the Son, but the Father; neither
knoweth any man the Father, save the
Son, and <hi rend='italic'>he to</hi> whomsoever the Son
will reveal <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 Come unto me, all <hi rend='italic'>ye</hi> that labour,
and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 Take my yoke upon you, and
learn of me: for I am meek and lowly
in heart; and ye shall find rest unto
your souls.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 For my yoke <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> easy, and my
burden is light.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>

<div>
<head>§ 46. While sitting at meat with a Pharisee,
Jesus is anointed by a woman who had been a sinner. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum</hi>?</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VII. 36-50.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 And one of the Pharisees desired
him that he would eat with him.
And he went into the Pharisee's house,
and sat down to meat.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 And behold, a woman in the city,
which was a sinner, when she knew
that <hi rend='italic'>Jesus</hi> sat at meat in the Pharisee's
house, brought an alabaster-box of
ointment,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 And stood at his feet behind
<hi rend='italic'>him</hi> weeping, and began to wash his
feet with tears, and did wipe <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>
with the hairs of her head, and kissed
his feet, and anointed <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> with the
ointment.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 Now, when the Pharisee which
had bidden him, saw <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, he spake
within himself, saying, This man, if
he were a prophet, would have known
who, and what manner of woman <hi rend='italic'>this
is</hi> that toucheth him: for she is a
sinner.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 And Jesus answering, said unto
him, Simon, I have somewhat to say
unto thee. And he saith, Master, say on.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 There was a certain creditor,
which had two debtors: the one owed
five hundred pence, and the other fifty.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 And when they had nothing to
pay, he frankly forgave them both.
Tell me, therefore, which of them will
love him most?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 Simon answered and said, I suppose
that <hi rend='italic'>he</hi>, to whom he forgave most.
And he said unto him, Thou hast
rightly judged.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 And he turned to the woman,
and said unto Simon, Seest thou this
woman? I entered into thine house,
thou gavest me no water for my feet:
but she hath washed my feet with
tears, and wiped <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> with the hairs
of her head.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 Thou gavest me no kiss: but
this woman, since the time I came in,
hath not ceased to kiss my feet.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46 My head with oil thou didst not
anoint: but this woman hath anointed
my feet with ointment.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>47 Wherefore I say unto thee, Her
sins which are many, are forgiven;
for she loved much: but to whom
little is forgiven, <hi rend='italic'>the same</hi> loveth
little.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>48 And he said unto her, Thy sins
are forgiven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>49 And they that sat at meat with
him, began to say within themselves,
Who is this that forgiveth sins also?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>50 And he said to the woman, Thy
faith hath saved thee; go in peace.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>

<div>
<head>§ 47. Jesus, with the Twelve,
makes a second circuit in Galilee.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VIII. 1-3.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>And it came to pass afterward, that
he went throughout every city and
village, preaching and shewing the
glad tidings of the kingdom of God:
and the twelve were with him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And certain women, which had
been healed of evil spirits and infirmities,
Mary called Magdalene, out of
whom went seven devils,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And Joanna the wife of Chuza,
Herod's steward, and Susanna, and
many others, which ministered unto
him of their substance.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 48. The healing of a demoniac.
The Scribes and Pharisees blaspheme. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XII. 22-37.</cell><cell>CH. III. 19-30.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>19 &mdash;&mdash; and they went into a house.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20 And the multitude cometh together
again, so that they could not
so much as eat bread.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21 And when his friends heard <hi rend='italic'>of
it</hi>, they went out to lay hold on him:
for they said, He is beside himself.</cell></row>
<row><cell>22 Then was brought unto him one
possessed with a devil, blind and
dumb; and he healed him, insomuch
that the blind and dumb,<note place='foot'>We here learn that the demoniac was both blind and dumb.
St. Luke omits the former circumstance, but does not contradict it. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note> both spake
and saw.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And all the people were amazed<note place='foot'>An accurate reader will observe that Matt. xii. 22,
and Luke xi. 14, show the general occasion of the blasphemy against Jesus; and that
Matt. xii. 23, shews the particular occasion of it, the multitude alarming the Jewish rulers
by their question whether Jesus were the Christ. No cause for the absurd and impious
insinuation of the Scribes and Pharisees is assigned by St. Mark: however, he suggests an
important circumstance, that they came from Jerusalem to watch the conduct of Jesus.
The latter part of Luke viii. 19, shows that his relations were not able to enter the house
on account of the press. Thus one Evangelist is wonderfully supplemental to another by
notations of time, place, and other circumstances; and the strictest propriety and agreement
result from diligently comparing them. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note>
and said, Is not this the son of David?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 But when the Pharisees heard
<hi rend='italic'>it</hi> they said, This <hi rend='italic'>fellow</hi> doth not cast
out devils, but by Beelzebub the prince
of the devils.</cell><cell>22 And the scribes which came
down from Jerusalem, said, He hath
Beelzebub, and by the prince of the
devils casteth he out devils.</cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And Jesus knew their thoughts,
and said unto them, Every kingdom
divided against itself, is brought to
desolation; and every city or house
divided against itself, shall not stand.</cell><cell>23 And he called them <hi rend='italic'>unto him</hi>,
and said unto them in parables, How
can Satan cast out Satan?</cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And if Satan cast out Satan, he
is divided against himself; how shall
then his kingdom stand?</cell><cell>24 And if a kingdom be divided
against itself, that kingdom cannot stand.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>25 And if a house be divided against
itself, that house cannot stand.</cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And if I by Beelzebub cast out
devils, by whom do your children cast
<hi rend='italic'>them</hi> out? therefore they shall be your judges.</cell><cell>26 And if Satan rise up against
himself, and be divided, he cannot
stand but hath an end.</cell></row>
<row><cell>28 But if I cast out devils by the
Spirit of God, then the kingdom of
he will first bind the strong man;</cell><cell>27 No man can enter into a strong
man's house and spoil his goods, except
he will first bind the strong man;
and then he will spoil his house.</cell></row>
<row><cell>29 Or else, how can one enter into
a strong man's house, and spoil his
goods, except he first bind the strong
man? and then he will spoil his house.</cell><cell>28 Verily, I say unto you, All sins
shall be forgiven unto the sons of men,
the blasphemies wherewith soever
they shall blaspheme:</cell></row>
<row><cell>30 He that is not with me is against
me; and he that gathereth not with
me, scattereth abroad.</cell><cell>29 But he that shall blaspheme
against the Holy Ghost hath never
forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation:</cell></row>
<row><cell>31 Wherefore I say unto you, All
manner of sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy
<hi rend='italic'>against</hi> the <hi rend='italic'>Holy</hi> Ghost shall not be
forgiven unto men.</cell><cell>30 Because they said, he hath an
unclean spirit.</cell></row>
<row><cell>32 And whosoever speaketh a word
against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven
him: but whosoever speaketh
against the Holy Ghost, it shall not
be forgiven him, neither in this world,
neither in the <hi rend='italic'>world</hi> to come.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 Either make the tree good, and
his fruit good; or else make the tree
corrupt, and his fruit corrupt: for the
tree is known by <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> fruit.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 O generation of vipers, how can
ye, being evil, speak good things?
for out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaketh.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 A good man, out of the good
treasure of the heart, bringeth forth
good things: and an evil man, out of the
evil treasure, bringeth forth evil things.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 But I say unto you, That every
idle word that men shall speak, they
shall give account thereof in the day of
judgment.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 For by thy words thou shalt be
justified, and by thy words thou shalt
be condemned.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XI. 14, 15, 17-23.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And he was casting out a devil,
and it was dumb. And it came to
pass when the devil was gone out,
the dumb spake; and the people wondered.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 But some of them said, He
casteth out devils through Beelzebub,
the chief of the devils.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 But he, knowing their thoughts,
said unto them, Every kingdom divided
against itself, is brought to desolation;
and a house <hi rend='italic'>divided</hi> against a
house, falleth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 If Satan also be divided against
himself, how shall his kingdom stand?
because ye say that I cast out devils
through Beelzebub.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And if I by Beelzebub cast out
devils, by whom do your sons cast
<hi rend='italic'>them</hi> out? therefore shall they be your
judges.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 But if I with the finger of God
cast out devils, no doubt the kingdom
of God is come upon you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 When a strong man armed keepeth
his palace, his goods are in peace:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 But when a stronger than he
shall come upon him, and overcome
him, he taketh from him all his armour,
wherein he trusted, and divideth
his spoils.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 He that is not with me, is against
me: and he that gathereth not with
me scattereth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>

<div>
<anchor id='Section_49'/>
<head>§ 49. The Scribes and Pharisees seek a sign.
Our Lord's reflection. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Luke.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XII. 38-45.</cell><cell>CH. XI. 16, 24-36.</cell></row>
<row><cell>38 Then certain of the scribes and
of the Pharisees answered, saying,
Master, we would see a sign from
thee.</cell><cell>And others tempting <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, sought
of him a sign from heaven.</cell></row>
<row><cell>39 But he answered and said to
them, An evil and adulterous generation
seeketh after a sign, and there
shall no sign be given<note place='foot'>The writer of a false narrative would either have
omitted to mention the request for a sign, or would have related that it was complied with.
He would never have exposed his Master to the suspicion of a want of power. See also,
Matt. xvi. 1.</note> to it, but the
sign of the prophet Jonas.</cell><cell>29 And when the people had gathered
thick together, he began to say,
This is an evil generation: they seek
a sign, and there shall no sign be
given it, but the sign of Jonas the
prophet.</cell></row>
<row><cell>40 For as Jonas was three days
and three nights in the whale's belly,<note place='foot'>Jonah i. 17.</note>
so shall the Son of man be three days
and three nights in the heart of the
earth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 The men of Nineveh shall rise
in judgment with this generation, and
shall condemn it: because they repented
at the preaching of Jonas,<note place='foot'>Jonah iii. 4, 5.</note> and
behold, a greater than Jonas <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> here.</cell><cell>30 For as Jonas was a sign unto
the Ninevites so shall also the Son of
man be to this generation.</cell></row>
<row><cell>42 The queen of the south shall
rise up in the judgment with this
generation, and shall condemn it: for
she came from the uttermost parts of
the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon;<note place='foot'>1 Kings x. 1 seq.</note>
and behold, a greater than
Solomon <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> here.</cell><cell>31 The queen of the south shall rise
up in the judgment with the men of
this generation, and condemn them:
for she came from the utmost parts of
the earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon;
and behold, a greater than
Solomon <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> here</cell></row>

<row><cell></cell><cell>32 The men of Nineveh shall rise
up in the judgment with this generation,
and shall condemn it: for they
repented at the preaching of Jonas;
and behold, a greater than Jonas <hi rend='italic'>is</hi>
here.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>33 No man when he hath lighted a
candle putteth <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> in a secret place,
neither under a bushel, but on a candlestick,
that they which come in may
see the light.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>34 The light of the body is thy eye:
therefore when thine eye is single,
thy whole body also is full of light;
but when <hi rend='italic'>thine eye</hi> is evil, thy body
also <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> full of darkness.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35 Take heed therefore, that the
light which is in thee be not darkness.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>36 If thy whole body therefore <hi rend='italic'>be</hi>
full of light, having no part dark, the
whole shall be full of light; as when
the bright shining of a candle doth
give thee light.</cell></row>
<row><cell>43 When the unclean spirit is gone
out of a man, he walketh through dry
places, seeking rest, and findeth none.</cell><cell>24 When the unclean spirit is gone
out of a man, he walketh through dry
places, seeking rest: and finding none,
he saith, I will return unto my house
whence I came out.</cell></row>
<row><cell>44 Then he saith, I will return into
my house from whence I came out;
and when he is come, he findeth <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>
empty, swept, and garnished.</cell><cell>25 And when he cometh, he findeth
<hi rend='italic'>it</hi> swept and garnished.</cell></row>
<row><cell>45 Then goeth he, and taketh with
himself seven other spirits more
wicked than himself, and they enter
in and dwell there: and the <hi rend='italic'>last state</hi>
of that man is worse than the first.
Even so shall it be also unto this
wicked generation.</cell><cell>26 Then goeth he, and taketh <hi rend='italic'>to
him</hi> seven other spirits more wicked
than himself; and they enter in, and
dwell there: and the <hi rend='italic'>last state</hi> of that
man is worse than the first.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>27 And it came to pass, as he spake
these things, a certain woman of the
company lifted up her voice, and said
unto him, Blessed <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> the womb that
bare thee, and the paps which thou
hast sucked.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>28 But he said, Yea, rather blessed
are they that hear the word of God,
and keep it.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>

<div>
<head>§ 50. The true disciples of Christ
his nearest relatives. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XII. 46-50.</cell><cell>CH. III. 31-35.</cell></row>
<row><cell>46 While he yet talked to the
people, behold, <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> mother and his
brethren stood without, desiring to
speak with him.</cell><cell>31 There came then his brethren
and his mother, and standing without,
sent unto him, calling him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>47 Then one said unto him, Behold,
thy mother and thy brethren stand
without, desiring to speak with thee.</cell><cell>32 And the multitude sat about
him; and they said unto him, Behold,
thy mother and thy brethren without
seek for thee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>48 But he answered and said unto
him that told him, Who is my mother?
and who are my brethren?</cell><cell>33 And he answered them, saying,
Who is my mother, or my brethren?
and who are my brethren?</cell></row>
<row><cell>49 And he stretched forth his hand
toward his disciples, and said, Behold
my mother and my brethren!</cell><cell>34 And he looked round about on
them which sat about him, and said,
Behold, my mother and my brethren!</cell></row>
<row><cell>50 For whosoever shall do the will
of my Father which is in heaven, the
same is my brother, and sister, and
mother.</cell><cell>35 For whosoever shall do the will
of God, the same is my brother, and
my sister, and mother.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VIII. 19-21.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 Then came to him <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> mother
and his brethren, and could not come
at him for the press.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And it was told him <hi rend='italic'>by certain</hi>,
which said, Thy mother and thy
brethren stand without, desiring to see
thee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And he answered and said unto
them, My mother and my brethren are
these which hear the word of God,
and do it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 51. At a Pharisee's table,
Jesus denounces woes against the Pharisees and others. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XI. 37-54</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 And as he spake, a certain
Pharisee besought him to dine with
him: and he went in and sat down to
meat.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 And when the Pharisee saw <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>,
he marvelled that he had not first
washed<note place='foot'>This omission may seem inconsistent with the
character of Jesus, who appears to have generally complied with all the innocent usages of
his countrymen; and of course it may be adduced as an objection against the veracity of
the Evangelist. Luke simply records the fact, however it may seem to make against the
character of his Master, or his own veracity. But Mark, vii. 3-9, in a manner equally
incidental and without design, discloses the truth that this washing was superstitious, and
connected with the dangerous error of placing the traditions of the elders on equal footing
with the commands of God. Where there was danger of his practice being misinterpreted,
our Lord withheld his compliance, even in things indifferent. See Bp. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Sumner</hi> on Luke,
Lect. 41.</note> before dinner.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 And the Lord said unto him,
Now do ye Pharisees make clean the
outside of the cup and the platter; but
your inward part is full of ravening
and wickedness.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 Ye fools, did not he that made
that which is without, make that which
is within also?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 But rather give alms of such
things as ye have; and behold, all
things are clean unto you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 But wo unto you, Pharisees! for
ye tithe mint, and rue, and all manner
of herbs, and pass over judgment and
the love of God: these ought ye to
have done, and not to leave the other
undone.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 Wo unto you, Pharisees! for ye
love the uppermost seats in the synagogues,
and greetings in the markets.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 Wo unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye are as graves
which appear not, and the men that
walk over <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> are not aware <hi rend='italic'>of them</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 Then answered one of the lawyers,
and said unto him, Master, thus
saying, thou reproachest us also.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46 And he said, Wo unto you also,
<hi rend='italic'>ye</hi> lawyers! for ye lade men with
burdens grievous to be borne, and ye
yourselves touch not the burdens with
one of your fingers.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>47 Wo unto you! for ye build the
sepulchres of the prophets, and your
fathers killed them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>48 Truly ye bear witness, that ye
allow the deeds of your fathers: for
they indeed killed them, and ye build
their sepulchres.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>49 Therefore also said the wisdom
of God, I will send them prophets and
apostles, and <hi rend='italic'>some</hi> of them they shall
slay and persecute:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>50. That the blood of all the prophets, which was shed from the foundation
of the world, may be required
of this generation;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>51 From the blood of Abel<note place='foot'>Gen. iv. 8; 2 Chron. xxiv. 20, seq.</note> unto the
blood of Zacharias, which perished between
the altar and the temple: verily,
I say unto you, It shall be required of
this generation.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>52 Wo unto you, lawyers! for ye
have taken away the key of knowledge:
ye entered not in yourselves, and them
that were entering in ye hindered.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>53 And as he said these things unto
them, the scribes and the Pharisees
began to urge <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> vehemently, and to
provoke him to speak of many things;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>54 Laying wait for him, and seeking
to catch something out of his mouth,
that they might accuse him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>

<div>
<head>§ 52. Jesus discourses to his disciples
and the multitude. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee.</hi></head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XII. 1-59.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>In the mean time, when there were
gathered together an innumerable multitude
of people, insomuch that they
trode one upon another, he began to
say unto his disciples first of all, Beware
ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which
is hypocrisy.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 For there is nothing covered, that
shall not be revealed; neither hid, that
shall not be known.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 Therefore, whatsoever ye have
spoken in darkness, shall be heard in
the light; and that which ye have
spoken in the ear in closets, shall be
proclaimed upon the house-tops.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And I say unto you, my friends,
Be not afraid of them that kill the body,
and after that, have no more that they
can do.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 But I will forewarn you whom ye
shall fear; Fear him, which, after he
hath killed, hath power to cast into
hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 Are not five sparrows sold for two
farthings, and not one of them is forgotten
before God?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 But even the very hairs of your
head are all numbered. Fear not therefore:
ye are of more value than many
sparrows.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 Also I say unto you, Whosoever
shall confess me before men, him shall
the Son of man also confess before the
angels of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 But he that denieth me before
men, shall be denied before the angels
of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And whosoever shall speak a
word against the Son of man, it shall
be forgiven him: but unto him that
blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost,
it shall not be forgiven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And when they bring you unto
the synagogues, and <hi rend='italic'>unto magistrates</hi>,
and powers, take ye no thought how
or what thing ye shall answer, or what
ye shall say:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 For the Holy Ghost shall teach
you in the same hour what ye ought
to say.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And one of the company said unto
him, Master, speak to my brother, that
he divide the inheritance with me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And he said unto him, Man, who
made me a judge, or a divider over
you?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And he said unto them, Take
heed, and beware of covetousness:
for a man's life consisteth not in the
abundance of the things which he
possesseth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And he spake a parable unto
them, saying, The ground of a certain
rich man brought forth plentifully:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And he thought within himself,
saying, What shall I do, because I
have no room where to bestow my
fruits?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 And he said, This will I do: I
will pull down my barns, and build
greater; and there will I bestow all
my fruits and my goods.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And I will say to my soul,
Soul, thou hast much goods laid up
for many years; take thine ease, eat,
drink, <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> be merry.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 But God said unto him, Thou
fool, this night thy soul shall be required
of thee: then whose shall those
things be, which thou hast provided?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 So <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> he that layeth up treasure
for himself, and is not rich toward God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And he said unto his disciples,
Therefore I say unto you, Take no
thought for your life, what ye shall
eat; neither for the body, what ye
shall put on.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 The life is more than meat, and
the body <hi rend='italic'>is more</hi> than raiment.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 Consider the ravens: for they
neither sow nor reap: which neither
have store-house, nor barn; and God
feedeth them. How much more are
ye better than the fowls?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And which of you with taking
thought can add to his stature one
cubit?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 If ye then be not able to do that
thing which is least, why take ye
thought for the rest?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 Consider the lilies how they
grow: they toil not, they spin not;
and yet I say unto you, that Solomon
in all his glory was not arrayed like
one of these.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 If then God so clothe the grass,
which is to-day in the field, and
to-morrow is cast into the oven; how
much more <hi rend='italic'>will he clothe</hi> you, O ye of
little faith?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And seek not ye what ye shall
eat, or what ye shall drink, neither be
ye of doubtful mind.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 For all these things do the
nations of the world seek after: and
your Father knoweth that ye have
need of these things.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 But rather seek ye the kingdom
of God, and all these things shall be
added unto you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 Fear not, little flock; for it is
your Father's good pleasure to give
you the kingdom.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 Sell that ye have, and give alms:
provide yourselves bags which wax not
old, a treasure in the heavens that
faileth not, where no thief approacheth,
neither moth corrupteth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 For where your treasure is,
there will your heart be also.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 Let your loins be girded about,
and <hi rend='italic'>your</hi> lights burning;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 And ye yourselves like unto men
that wait for their lord, when he will
return from the wedding; that, when
he cometh and knocketh, they may
open unto him immediately.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 Blessed <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> those servants, whom
the lord when he cometh shall find
watching: verily, I say unto you, that
he shall gird himself, and make them
to sit down to meat, and will come
forth and serve them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 And if he shall come in the
second watch, or come in the third
watch, and find <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> so, blessed are
those servants.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 And this know, that if the good
man of the house had known what
hour the thief would come, he would
have watched, and not have suffered
his house to be broken through.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 Be ye therefore ready also: for
the Son of man cometh at an hour
when ye think not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 Then Peter said unto him, Lord,
speakest thou this parable unto us, or
even to all?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 And the Lord said, Who then is
that faithful and wise steward, whom
his lord shall make ruler over his
household, to give <hi rend='italic'>them their</hi> portion
of meat in due season?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 Blessed <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> that servant, whom
his lord when he cometh shall find so
doing.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 Of a truth I say unto you, That
he will make him ruler over all that
he hath.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 But and if that servant say in
his heart, My lord delayeth his coming;
and shall begin to beat the men-servants,
and maidens, and to eat and drink, and
to be drunken;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46 The lord of that servant will
come in a day when he looketh not for
<hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, and at an hour when he is not
aware, and will cut him in sunder,
and will appoint him his portion with
the unbelievers.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>47 And that servant which knew his
lord's will, and prepared not <hi rend='italic'>himself</hi>,
neither did according to his will, shall
be beaten with many <hi rend='italic'>stripes</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>48 But he that knew not, and did
commit things worthy of stripes, shall
be beaten with few <hi rend='italic'>stripes</hi>. For unto
whomsoever much is given, of him
shall much be required; and to whom
men have committed much, of him
they will ask the more.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>49 I am come to send fire on the
earth, and what will I, if it be already
kindled?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>50 But I have a baptism to be baptized
with; and how am I straitened
till it be accomplished!</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>51 Suppose ye that I am come to
give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay;
but rather division:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>52 For from henceforth there shall
be five in one house divided, three
against two, and two against three.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>53 The father shall be divided
against the son, and the son against
the father; the mother against the
daughter, and the daughter against
the mother; the mother-in-law against
her daughter-in-law, and the daughter-in-law
against her mother-in-law.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>54 And he said also to the people,
When ye see a cloud rise out of the
west,<note place='foot'>The autumnal rains in Palestine come mostly
from the west or south-west. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Robinson's</hi> Biblical Researches, vol. ii. p. 97. The
incidental allusion here made to that fact, would hardly have been made by a writer
of fiction.</note> straightway ye say, There cometh
a shower; and so it is.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>55 And when <hi rend='italic'>ye see</hi> the south wind
blow, ye say, There will be heat; and
it cometh to pass.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>56 Ye hypocrites, ye can discern
the face of the sky and of the earth;
but how is it, that ye do not discern
this time?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>57 Yea, and why even of yourselves
judge ye not what is right?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>58 When thou goest with thine adversary
to the magistrate, <hi rend='italic'>as thou art</hi>
in the way, give diligence that thou
mayest be delivered from him; lest
he hale thee to the judge, and the
judge deliver thee to the officer, and
the officer cast thee into prison.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>59 I tell thee, thou shalt not depart
thence, till thou hast paid the very last
mite.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>

<div>
<head>§ 53. The slaughter of certain Galileans.
Parable of the barren fig-tree. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIII. 1-9.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>There were present at that season
some that told him of the Galileans,
whose blood Pilate had mingled with
their sacrifices.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And Jesus answering, said unto
them, Suppose ye that these Galileans
were sinners above all the Galileans,
because they suffered such things?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 I tell you, Nay; but, except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 Or those eighteen, upon whom the
tower in Siloam fell, and slew them,
think ye that they were sinners above
all men that dwelt in Jerusalem?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 I tell you, Nay; but, except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 He spake also this parable: A
certain <hi rend='italic'>man</hi> had a fig-tree planted in
his vineyard; and he came and sought
fruit thereon, and found none.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 Then said he unto the dresser of
his vineyard, Behold, these three years
I come seeking fruit on this fig-tree,
and find none: cut it down; why cumbereth
it the ground?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And he answering, said unto him,
Lord, let it alone this year also, till I
shall dig about it, and dung <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And if it bear fruit, <hi rend='italic'>well</hi>: and if
not, <hi rend='italic'>then</hi> after that thou shalt cut it
down.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>

<div>
<head>§ 54. The parable of the sower. <hi rend='italic'>Lake of Galilee. Near Capernaum</hi>?</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIII. 1-23.</cell><cell>CH. IV. 1-25.</cell></row>
<row><cell>The same day went Jesus out of
the house, and sat by the sea-side.</cell><cell>And he began again to teach by the
sea-side: and there was gathered unto
him a great multitude, so that he entered
into a ship, and sat in the sea;
and the whole multitude was by the
sea, on the land.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And great multitudes were gathered
together unto him, so that he
went into a ship, and sat; and the
whole multitude stood on the shore.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And he spake many things unto
them in parables, saying, Behold, a
sower went forth to sow;</cell><cell>2 And he taught them many things
by parables, and said unto them in his doctrine,</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>3 Hearken; Behold, there went out
a sower to sow.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And when he sowed, some <hi rend='italic'>seeds</hi>
fell by the way-side, and the fowls
came and devoured them up:</cell><cell>4 And it came to pass as he sowed,
some fell by the way-side, and the
fowls of the air came and devoured it up.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5 Some fell upon stony places
where they had not much earth: and
forthwith they sprung up, because they
had no deepness of earth:</cell><cell>5 And some fell on stony ground,
where it had not much earth; and immediately
it sprang up, because it had
no depth of earth:</cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And when the sun was up, they
were scorched; and because they had
no root, they withered away.</cell><cell>6 But when the sun was up it was
scorched; and because it had no root,
it withered away.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And some fell among thorns; and
the thorns sprung up, and choked
them:</cell><cell>7 And some fell among thorns, and
the thorns grew up, and choked it, and
it yielded no fruit.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8 But other fell into good ground,
and brought forth fruit, some a hundred-fold,
some sixty-fold, some thirty-fold.</cell><cell>8 And other fell on good ground,
and did yield fruit that sprang up,
and increased, and brought forth, some
thirty, and some sixty, and some a hundred.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9 Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.</cell><cell>9 And he said unto them, He that
hath ears to hear, let him hear.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And the disciples came, and said
unto him, Why speakest thou unto
them in parables?</cell><cell>10 And when he was alone, they
that were about him, with the twelve,
asked of him the parable.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11 He answered and said unto
them, Because it is given unto you to
know the mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven, but to them it is not given.</cell><cell>11 And he said unto them, Unto
you it is given to know the mystery
of the kingdom of God: but unto them
that are without, all <hi rend='italic'>these</hi> things are
done in parables:</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 For whosoever hath, to him
shall be given, and he shall have more
abundance: but whosoever hath not,
from him shall be taken away even
that he hath.</cell><cell>12 That seeing they may see, and
not perceive; and hearing they may
hear, and not understand; lest at any
time they should be converted, and
<hi rend='italic'>their</hi> sins should be forgiven them.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13 Therefore speak I to them in
parables: because they seeing, see not;
and hearing, they hear not; neither do
they understand.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And in them is fulfilled the prophecy
of Esaias,<note place='foot'>Is. vi. 9, 10.</note> which saith, By
hearing ye shall hear, and shall not
understand; and seeing ye shall see,
and shall not perceive:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 For this people's heart is waxed
gross, and <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> ears are dull of hearing,
and their eyes they have closed;
lest at any time they should <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> with
<hi rend='italic'>their</hi> eyes, and hear with <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> ears,
and should understand with <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> heart,
and should be converted, and I should
heal them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 But <hi rend='italic'>blessed are</hi> your eyes, for
they see: and your ears, for they hear.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 For, verily I say unto you, That
many prophets and righteous <hi rend='italic'>men</hi> have
desired to see <hi rend='italic'>those things</hi> which ye
see, and have not seen <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>; and to
hear <hi rend='italic'>those things</hi> which ye hear, and
have not heard <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 Hear ye therefore the parable of
the sower.</cell><cell>13 And he said unto them, Know
ye not this parable? and how then will
ye know all parables?</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 When any one heareth the word
of the kingdom, and understandeth <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>
not, then cometh the wicked <hi rend='italic'>one</hi>, and
catcheth away that which was sown
in his heart. This is he which received
seed by the way-side.</cell><cell>14 The sower soweth the word.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15 And these are they by the way-side,
where the word is sown; but
when they have heard, Satan cometh
immediately, and taketh away the word
that was sown in their hearts.</cell></row>
<row><cell>20 But he that received the seed
into stony places, the same is he that
heareth the word, and anon with joy
receiveth it;</cell><cell>16 And these are they likewise
which are sown on stony ground;
who, when they have heard the word,
immediately receive it with gladness;</cell></row>
<row><cell>21 Yet hath he not root in himself,
but dureth for a while: for when tribulation
or persecution ariseth because
of the word, by and by he is offended.</cell><cell>17 And have no root in themselves,
and so endure but for a time: afterward,
when affliction or persecution
ariseth for the word's sake, immediately
they are offended.</cell></row>
<row><cell>22 He also that received seed among
the thorns is he that heareth the word;
and the care of this world, and the deceitfulness
of riches, choke the word,
and he becometh unfruitful.</cell><cell>18 and these are they which are
sown among thorns; such as hear the word,</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>19 And the cares of this world, and
the deceitfulness of riches, and the
lusts of other things entering in, choke
the word, and it becometh unfruitful.</cell></row>
<row><cell>23 But he that received seed into
the good ground is he that heareth the
word, and understandeth <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>; which
also beareth fruit, and bringeth forth,
some a hundred-fold, some sixty, some
thirty.</cell><cell>20 And these are they which are
sown on good ground; such as hear
the word, and receive it, and bring
forth fruit, some thirty-fold, some
sixty, and some a hundred.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21 And he said unto them, Is a
candle brought to be put under a
bushel, or under a bed? and not to be
set on a candlestick?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22 For there is nothing hid, which
shall not be manifested; neither was
any thing kept secret, but that it should
come abroad.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>23 If any man have ears to hear,
let him hear.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>24 And he said unto them, Take
heed what ye hear: With what measure
ye mete, it shall be measured to
you: and unto you that hear shall
more be given.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>25 For he that hath, to him shall
be given: and he that hath not, from
him shall be taken even that which he
hath.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VIII. 4-18.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And when much people were
gathered together, and were come to
him out of every city, he spake by a
parable:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 A sower went out to sow his
seed: and as he sowed, some fell by
the way-side; and it was trodden
down, and the fowls of the air devoured
it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And some fell upon a rock; and
as soon as it was sprung up, it withered
away, because it lacked moisture.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And some fell among thorns; and
the thorns sprang up with it, and
choked it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And other fell on good ground,
and sprang up, and bare fruit a hundred-fold.
And when he had said
these things, he cried, He that hath
ears to hear, let him hear.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And his disciples asked him,
saying, What might this parable be?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And he said, Unto you it is
given to know the mysteries of the
kingdom of God: but to others in
parables; that seeing they might not
see, and hearing they might not understand.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 Now the parable is this: The
seed is the word of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 Those by the way-side, are they
that hear: then cometh the devil, and
taketh away the word out of their
hearts, lest they should believe and
be saved.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 They on the rock <hi rend='italic'>are they</hi>,
which, when they hear, receive the
word with joy; and these have no
root, which for a while believe, and in
times of temptation fall away.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And that which fell among
thorns, are they, which, when they
have heard, go forth, and are choked
with cares, and riches, and pleasures of
<hi rend='italic'>this</hi> life, and bring no fruit to perfection.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 But that on the good ground are
they, which, in an honest and good
heart, having heard the word, keep <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>,
and bring forth fruit with patience.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 No man, when he hath lighted
a candle, covereth it with a vessel, or
putteth <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> under a bed; but setteth <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>
on a candlestick, that they which enter
in may see the light.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 For nothing is secret, that shall
not be made manifest; neither <hi rend='italic'>anything</hi>
hid, that shall not be known,
and come abroad.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 Take heed therefore how ye
hear: for whosoever hath, to him
shall be given: and whosoever hath
not, from him shall be taken even that
which he seemeth to have.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>

<div>
<head>§ 55. Parable of the tares.
Other parables. <hi rend='italic'>Near Capernaum</hi>?</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIII. 24-53.</cell><cell>CH. IV. 26-34.</cell></row>
<row><cell>24 Another parable put he forth
unto them, saying, The kingdom of
heaven is likened unto a man which
sowed good seed in his field:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 But while men slept, his enemy
came and sowed tares among the
wheat, and went his way.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 But when the blade was sprung
up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared
the tares also.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 So the servants of the householder
came and said unto him, Sir,
didst not thou sow good seed in thy
field? from whence then hath it tares?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 He said unto them, An enemy
hath done this. The servant said
unto him, Wilt thou then that we go
and gather them up?</cell><cell>26 And he said, So is the kingdom
of God, as if a man should cast seed
into the ground;</cell></row>
<row><cell>29 But he said, Nay; lest while
ye gather up the tares, ye root up also
the wheat with them.</cell><cell>27 And should sleep, and rise night
and day, and the seed should spring
and grow up, he knoweth not how.</cell></row>
<row><cell>30 Let both grow together until the
harvest: and in the time of harvest I
will say to the reapers, Gather ye
together first the tares, and bind them
in bundles to burn them: but gather
the wheat into my barn.</cell><cell>28 For the earth bringeth forth fruit
of herself; first the blade, then the
ear, after that the full corn in the ear.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>29 But when the fruit is brought
forth, immediately he putteth in the
sickle, because the harvest is come.</cell></row>
<row><cell>31 Another parable put he forth
unto them, saying, The kingdom of
heaven is like to a grain of mustard-seed,
which a man took, and sowed in
his field:</cell><cell>30 And he said, Whereunto shall
we liken the kingdom of God? or
with what comparison shall we compare it?</cell></row>
<row><cell>32 Which indeed is the least of all
seeds: but when it is grown, it is the
greatest among herbs, and becometh a
tree, so that the birds of the air come
and lodge in the branches thereof.</cell><cell>31 It <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> like a grain of mustard-seed,
which when it is sown in the
earth, in less than all the seeds that be in the earth:</cell></row>
<row><cell>33 Another parable spake he unto
them; The kingdom of heaven is like
unto leaven, which a woman took,
and hid in three measures of meal,
till the whole was leavened.</cell><cell>32 But when it is sown, it groweth
up, and becometh greater than all herbs,
and shooteth out great branches; so
that the fowls of the air may lodge
under the shadow of it.</cell></row>
<row><cell>34 All these things spake Jesus
unto the multitude in parables; and
without a parable spake he not unto
them:</cell><cell>33 And with many such parables
spake he the word unto them, as they
were able to hear <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell>35 That it might be fulfilled which
was spoken by the prophet,<note place='foot'>Ps. lxxviii. 2.</note> saying,
I will open my mouth in parables; I
will utter things which have been
kept secret from the foundation of the
world.</cell><cell>34 But without a parable spake he
not unto them: and when they were
alone, he expounded all things to his disciples.</cell></row>
<row><cell>36 Then Jesus sent the multitude
away, and went into the house: and
his disciples came unto him, saying,
Declare unto us the parable of the
tares of the field.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 He answered and said unto them,
He that soweth the good seed is the
Son of man;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 The field is the world; the good
seed are the children of the kingdom; but the tares are the children of the
wicked <hi rend='italic'>one</hi>;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 The enemy that sowed them is
the devil; the harvest is the end of
the world; and the reapers are the
angels.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 As therefore the tares are
gathered and burned in the fire;
so shall it be in the end of this
world.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 The Son of man shall send
forth his angels, and they shall gather
out of his kingdom all things that
offend, and them which do iniquity;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 And shall cast them into a furnace
of fire; there shall be wailing
and gnashing of teeth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 Then shall the righteous shine
forth as the sun in the kingdom of
their Father. Who hath ears to hear,
let him hear.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 Again, The kingdom of heaven
is like unto treasure hid in a field; the
which when a man hath found, he
hideth, and for joy thereof goeth and
selleth all that he hath, and buyeth
that field.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 Again, The kingdom of heaven
is like unto a merchant-man seeking
goodly pearls:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46 Who, when he had found one
pearl of great price, went and sold all
that he had, and bought it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>47 Again, The kingdom of heaven
is like unto a net, that was cast into
the sea, and gathered of every kind:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>48 Which, when it was full, they
drew to shore, and sat down, and
gathered the good into vessels, but
cast the bad away.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>49 So shall it be at the end of the
world: the angels shall come forth,
and sever the wicked from among the
just,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>50 And shall cast them into the
furnace of fire: there shall be wailing
and gnashing of teeth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>51 Jesus saith unto them, Have ye
understood all these things? They
say unto him, Yea, Lord.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>52 Then said he unto them, Therefore
every scribe <hi rend='italic'>which is</hi> instructed
unto the kingdom of heaven, is like
unto a man <hi rend='italic'>that is</hi> a householder,
which bringeth forth out of his treasure
<hi rend='italic'>things</hi> new and old.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>53 And it came to pass, <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> when
Jesus had finished these parables, he
departed thence.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>

<div>
<head>§ 56. Jesus directs to cross the lake. Incidents.
The tempest stilled. <hi rend='italic'>Lake of Galilee</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VIII. 18-27.</cell><cell>CH. IV. 35-41.</cell></row>
<row><cell>18 Now when Jesus saw great
multitudes about him, he gave commandment
to depart unto the other
side.</cell><cell>And the same day, when the
even was come, he saith unto them,
Let us pass over unto the other side.</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And a certain scribe came, and
said unto him, Master, I will follow
thee whithersoever thou goest.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And Jesus saith unto him, The
foxes have holes, and the birds of the
air <hi rend='italic'>have</hi> nests; but the Son of man
hath not where to lay <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> head.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And another of his disciples
said unto him, Lord, suffer me first to
go and bury my father.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 But Jesus said unto him, Follow
me; and let the dead bury their
dead.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And when he was entered into
a ship, his disciples followed him.</cell><cell>36 And when they had sent away
the multitude, they took him even as
he was in the ship. And there were
also with him other little ships.</cell></row>
<row><cell>24 And behold, there arose a great
tempest in the sea, insomuch that the
ship was covered with the waves: but
he was asleep.</cell><cell>37 And there arose a great storm
of wind, and the waves beat into the
ship, so that it was now full.</cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And his disciples came to <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>,
and awoke him, saying, Lord, save us:
we perish.</cell><cell>38 And he was in the hinder part
of the ship, asleep on a pillow: and
they awake him, and say unto him,
Master, carest thou not that we perish?</cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And he saith unto them, Why
are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?
Then he arose, and rebuked the winds
and the sea; and there was a great
calm.</cell><cell>39 And he arose and rebuked the
wind, and said unto the sea, Peace,
be still: and the wind ceased, and
there was a great calm.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>40 And he said unto them, Why
are ye so fearful? how is that ye
have no faith?</cell></row>
<row><cell>27 But the men marvelled, saying,
What manner of man is this, that
even the winds and the sea obey
him!</cell><cell>41 And they feared exceedingly,
and said one to another, What manner
of man is this, that even the wind
and the sea obey him?</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VIII. 22-25.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX. 57-62.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 Now it came to pass on a certain
day, that he went into a ship with
his disciples: and he said unto them,
Let us go over unto the other side of
the lake.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>
CH. IX.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>
57 And it came to pass, that as
they went in the way, a certain <hi rend='italic'>man</hi>
said unto him, Lord, I will follow thee
whithersoever thou goest.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>58 And Jesus said unto him, Foxes
have holes, and birds of the air <hi rend='italic'>have</hi>
nests; but the Son of man hath not
where to lay <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> head.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>59 And he said unto another, Follow
me. But he said, Lord, suffer
me first to go and bury my father.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>60 Jesus said unto him, Let the
dead bury their dead: but go thou and
preach the kingdom of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>61 And another also said, Lord, I
will follow thee; but let me first go
bid them farewell which are at home
at my house.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>62 And Jesus said unto him, No
man having put his hand to the plough,
and looking back, is fit for the kingdom
of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>
CH. VIII.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And they launched forth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 But as they sailed, he fell
asleep: and there came down a storm
of wind on the lake; and they were
filled <hi rend='italic'>with water</hi>, and were in jeopardy.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 And they came to him, and
awoke him, saying, Master, Master,
we perish. Then he arose, and rebuked
the wind, and the raging of the
water: and they ceased, and there
was a calm.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And he said unto them, Where
is your faith? And they being afraid,
wondered, saying one to another,
What manner of man is this! for he
commandeth even the winds and
water, and they obey him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>

<div>
<head>§ 57. The two demoniacs
of Gadara. <hi rend='italic'>S. E. coast of the Lake of Galilee</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VIII. 28-34.</cell><cell>CH. V. 1-21.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX. 1.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 And when he was come to the
other side, into the country of the
Gegesenes,<note place='foot'><p>This is made consistent with the other Evangelists,
by reading <q>Gadarenes.</q> If Gergasa was subordinate to Gadara, the metropolis of
Perea, as Cellarius and Reland judge, and St. Mark did not write in Judea, what wonder
that he chose the more general name, which was best known in the world?  But Cellarius
from Eusebius takes notice that some esteemed Gergasi, so Eusebius writes it, and
Gadara two names of the same city; and this he thinks was the sentiment of the Syriac
translator. To this Sir Richard Ellis most inclines, in his <q>Fortuita Sacra.</q> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Townson</hi>, p. 72.
</p>
<p>
In Matthew mention is made of two demoniacs; in Mark and Luke of one only.
Here Le Clerc's maxim is undoubtedly true: Qui plura narrat, pauciora complectitur:
qui pauciora memorat, plura non negat. <hi rend='italic'>Harm</hi>. p. 524.
</p>
<p>
We may collect a reason from the Gospels themselves, why Mark and Luke mention
only one demoniac; because, one only being grateful for the miracle, his cure
only was recorded by the two Evangelists, who mention this gratitude, and who
are more intent on inculcating the moral, than on magnifying our Lord's power.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</p></note> there met him two possessed
with devils, coming out of the
tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no
man might pass by that way.</cell><cell>And they came over unto the other
side of the sea, into the country of the
Gadarenes.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2 And when he was come out of
the ship, immediately there met him
out of the tombs a man with an unclean
spirit,</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>3 Who had <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> dwelling among the
tombs; and no man could bind him,
no, not with his chains:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>4 Because that he had been often
bound with fetters and chains, and the
chains had been plucked asunder by
him, and the fetters broken in pieces:
neither could any <hi rend='italic'>man</hi> tame him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5 And always, night and day, he
was in the mountains, and in the
tombs, crying, and cutting himself
with stones.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>6 But when he saw Jesus afar off,
he ran and worshipped him,</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>7 And cried with a loud voice, and
said, What have I to do with thee,
Jesus, <hi rend='italic'>thou</hi> Son of the most high
God? I adjure thee by God, that
thou torment me not.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>8 (For he said unto him, Come out
of the man, <hi rend='italic'>thou</hi> unclean spirit.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And behold, they cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee,
Jesus, thou Son of God? art thou
come hither to torment us before the time?</cell><cell>9 And
he asked him, What <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> thy
name? And he answered, saying,
My name <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> Legion: for we are many.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>10 And he besought him much
that he would not send them away
out of the country.</cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And there was a good way off<note place='foot'>There is no contradiction here between Matth. and
Mark. The demoniacs met Jesus on the shore, as he came out of the ship. Luke viii.
27. The swine were within sight, on the ascending ground, Luke viii. 32, at the side of
the mountain, Mark v. 11, which was at some distance from the shore where they stood.
Matth. viii. 30.</note>
from them a herd of many swine,
feeding.</cell><cell>11 Now there was there nigh unto
the mountains a great herd of swine<note place='foot'>Since swine were held in abhorrence by the Jews, how
happened a herd of them to be feeding by the sea of Tiberias? The answer shows
the accuracy of the Evangelist and his intimate knowledge of the local circumstances of
Judea; for it appears from Josephus, Antiq. xvii. 11, 4, that <hi rend='italic'>Gadara</hi> was a <hi rend='italic'>Grecian city</hi>,
the inhabitants of which, therefore, were not Jews. <hi rend='smallcaps'>BLunt</hi>, Veracity, &amp;c. sect. ii. 6.</note> feeding.</cell></row>
<row><cell>31 So the devils besought him, saying
If thou cast us out, suffer us to
go away into the herd of swine.</cell><cell>12 And all the devils besought him,
saying, Send us into the swine, that
we may enter into them.</cell></row>
<row><cell>32 And he said unto them, Go.
And when they were come out, they
went into the herd of swine: and behold,
the whole herd of swine ran
violently down a steep place into the
sea, and perished in the waters.</cell><cell>13 And forthwith Jesus gave them
leave. And the unclean spirits went
out, and entered into the swine: and
the herd ran violently down a steep
place into the sea, (they were about
two thousand) and were choked in the sea.</cell></row>
<row><cell>33 And they that kept them, fled,
and went their ways into the city, and
told everything; and what was befallen
to the possessed of the devils.</cell><cell>14 And they that fed the swine
fled and told <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> in the city, and in the
country. And they went out to see
what it was that was done.</cell></row>
<row><cell>34 And behold, the whole city came
out to meet Jesus: and when they
saw him, they besought him that he
would depart out of their coasts.</cell><cell>15 And they come to Jesus, and
see him that was possessed with the
devil, and had the legion, sitting, and
clothed, and in his right mind: and
they were afraid.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>16 And they that saw <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> told them
how it befell to him that was possessed
with the devil, and also concerning
the swine.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17 And they began to pray him to
depart out of their coasts.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>And he entered into a ship, and
passed over, and came into his own
city.</cell><cell>18 And when he was come into
the ship, he that had been possessed
with the devil prayed him that he
might be with him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>19 Howbeit Jesus suffered him not,
but saith unto him, Go home to thy
friends, and tell them how great
things the Lord hath done for thee,
and hath had compassion on thee.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20 And he departed, and began to
publish in Decapolis how great things
Jesus had done for him. And all <hi rend='italic'>men</hi>
did marvel.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21 And when Jesus was passed
over again by ship unto the other side,
much people gathered unto him: and
he was nigh unto the sea.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VIII. 26-40.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And they arrived at the country
of the Gadarenes, which is over
against Galilee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And when he went forth to land,
there met him out of the city a certain
man, which had devils long time,
and ware no clothes, neither abode in
<hi rend='italic'>any</hi> house, but in the tombs.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 When he saw Jesus, he cried
out, and fell down before him, and
with a loud voice said, What have I
to do with thee, Jesus, <hi rend='italic'>thou</hi> Son of
God most high? I beseech thee torment
me not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 (For he had commanded the
unclean spirit to come out of the man.
For oftentimes it had caught him:
and he was kept bound with chains,
and in fetters; and he brake the bands,
and was driven of the devil into the
wilderness.)</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And Jesus asked him, saying,
What is thy name? And he said,
Legion: because many devils were
entered into him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 And they besought him, that he
would not command them to go out
into the deep.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 And there was there a herd of
many swine feeding on the mountain:
and they besought him that he would
suffer them to enter into them. And
he suffered them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 Then went the devils out of the
man, and entered into the swine: and
the herd ran violently down a steep
place into the lake, and were choked.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 When they that fed <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> saw
what was done, they fled, and went
and told <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> in the city and in the country.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 Then they went out to see what
was done; and came to Jesus, and
found the man out of whom the devils
were departed, sitting at the feet of
Jesus,<note place='foot'>Here is a reference to an Eastern custom,
which affords internal evidence of the truth of the narrative. The master sat on a higher
seat, and the scholars sat at his feet. Sitting at the feet, was the posture of a learner; and
indicated the reverence and submission due to the teacher. Thus Moses says of the
people, to whom God gave the law from Mount Sinai,&mdash;<q>they sat down at thy feet.</q>
Deut. xxxiii. 3. Isaiah, speaking of Abraham, who was taught of God, says <q>he called
him to his foot.</q> Is. xli. 2. Mary <q>sat at Jesus's feet and heard his words.</q> Luke x. 39.
Paul was brought up <q>at the feet of Gamaliel;</q> Acts xxii. 3; studied law with him.
And the restored maniac sat down at Jesus's feet, in the posture of a humble learner,
desiring no other wisdom than to be taught of him.</note> clothed, and in his right mind:
and they were afraid.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 They also which saw <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, told
them by what means he that was possessed
of the devils was healed.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 Then the whole multitude of the
country of the Gadarenes round about,
besought him to depart from them;
for they were taken with great fear.
And he went up into the ship, and returned
back again.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 Now, the man out of whom the
devils were departed, besought him
that he might be with him. But
Jesus sent him away, saying,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 Return to thine own house, and
shew how great things God hath done
unto thee. And he went his way and
published throughout the whole city,
how great things Jesus had done unto
him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 And it came to pass, that, when
Jesus was returned, the people <hi rend='italic'>gladly</hi>
received him: for they were all waiting
for him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>

<div>
<head>§ 58. Levi's feast. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX. 10-17.</cell><cell>CH. II. 15-22.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And it came to pass, as Jesus
sat at meat in the house,<note place='foot'>Both Mark and Luke state that this was in Matthew's
own house; and Luke calls it a great feast, made in honour of Jesus. The omission of
this fact by Matthew, not only shows his modesty and humility, but adds much to the
weight of evidence in his favour, both as a man, and as a witness.  See <hi rend='smallcaps'>Blunt's</hi> Veracity
of the Gospels, sect. i. 4.</note> behold,
many publicans and sinners came and
sat down with him and his disciples.</cell><cell>15 And it came to pass, that as
Jesus sat at meat in his house, many
publicans and sinners sat also together
with Jesus and his disciples; for there
were many, and they followed him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And when the Pharisees saw <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>,
they said unto his disciples, Why eateth
your Master with publicans and
sinners?</cell><cell>16 And when the scribes and Pharisees
saw him eat with publicans and
sinners, they said unto his disciples,
How is it that he eateth and drinketh
with publicans and sinners?</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 But when Jesus heard <hi rend='italic'>that</hi>, he
said unto them, They that be whole
need not a physician, but they that are
sick.</cell><cell>17 When Jesus heard <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, he saith
unto them, They that are whole, have
no need of the physician, but they
that are sick: I came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13 But go ye and learn what <hi rend='italic'>that</hi>
meaneth,<note place='foot'>Hos. vi. 6; 1 Sam. xv. 22.</note> I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice: for I am not come to call
the righteous, but sinners to repentance.</cell><cell>18 And the disciples of John, and
of the Pharisees, used to fast: and
they come, and say unto unto him, Why
do the disciples of John, and of the
Pharisees fast, but thy disciples fast not?</cell></row>
<row><cell>14 Then came to him the disciples
of John, saying, Why do we and the
Pharisees fast oft, but thy disciples
fast not?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And Jesus said unto them, Can
the children of the bride-chamber
mourn, as long as the bridegroom is
with them? but the days will come,
when the bridegroom shall be taken
from them, and then shall they fast.</cell><cell>19 And Jesus said unto them, Can
the children of the bride-chamber fast,
while the bridegroom is with them?
As long as they have the bridegroom
with them, they cannot fast.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20 But the days will come, when
the bridegroom shall be taken away
from them, and then shall they fast
in those days.</cell></row>
<row><cell>16 No man putteth a piece of new
cloth unto an old garment: for that
which is put in to fill it up, taketh
from the garment, and the rent is
made worse.</cell><cell>21 No man also seweth a piece of
new cloth on an old garment: else
the new piece that filled it up, taketh
away from the old, and the rent is
made worse.</cell></row>
<row><cell>17 Neither do men put new wine
into old bottles: else the bottles break,
and the wine runneth out, and the
bottles perish: but they put new wine
into new bottles, and both are preserved.</cell><cell>22 And no man putteth new wine
into old bottles: else the new wine
doth burst the bottles, and the wine is
spilled, and the bottles will be marred:
but new wine must be put into new bottles.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. V. 29-39.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And Levi made him a great
feast in his own house; and there
was a great company of publicans,
and of others that sat down with
publicans and sinners?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 But their scribes and Pharisees
murmured against his disciples, saying,
Why do you eat and drink with
publicans and sinners?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 And Jesus answering, said unto
them, They that are whole need not
a physician; but they that are sick.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 I came not to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 And they said unto him, Why
do the disciples of John fast often,
and make prayers, and likewise <hi rend='italic'>the
disciples</hi> of the Pharisees; but thine
eat and drink?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 And he said unto them, Can
ye make the children of the bride-chamber
fast, while the bridegroom is
with them?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 But the days will come, when
the bridegroom shall be taken away
from them, and then shall they fast
in those days.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 And he spake also a parable
unto them; No man putteth a piece of
a new garment upon an old: if otherwise, then both the new maketh a rent,
and the piece that was <hi rend='italic'>taken</hi> out of the
new, agreeth not with the old.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 And no man putteth new wine
into old bottles; else the new wine
will burst the bottles, and be spilled,
and the bottles shall perish.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 But new wine must be put into
new bottles, and both are preserved.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 No man also having drunk old
<hi rend='italic'>wine</hi>, straightway desireth new: for
he saith, The old is better.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>

<div>
<head>§ 59. The raising of Jairus's daughter.
The woman with a bloody flux. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX. 18-26.</cell><cell>CH. V. 22-43.</cell></row>
<row><cell>18 While he spake these things
unto them, behold, there came a certain
ruler, and worshipped him, saying,
My daughter is even now dead:
but come and lay thy hand upon her,
and she shall live.</cell><cell>22 And behold, there cometh one
of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus
by name; and when he saw him, he
fell at his feet.</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And Jesus arose, and followed
him, and <hi rend='italic'>so did</hi> his disciples.</cell><cell>23 And besought him greatly, saying,
My little daughter lieth at the
point of death: <hi rend='italic'>I pray thee</hi>, come and
lay thy hands on her, that she may
be healed; and she shall live.</cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And behold, a woman which
was diseased with an issue of blood
twelve years, came behind <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, and
touched the hem of his garment.</cell><cell>24 And <hi rend='italic'>Jesus</hi> went with him; and
much people followed him, and
thronged him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21 For she said within herself, If I
may but touch his garment, I shall be
whole.</cell><cell>25 And a certain woman which had
an issue of blood twelve years,</cell></row>
<row><cell>22 But Jesus turned him about, and
when he saw her, he said, Daughter,
be of good comfort: thy faith hath
made thee whole. And the woman
was made whole from that hour.</cell><cell>26 And had suffered many things
of many physicians, and had spent all
that she had, and was nothing bettered,
but rather grew worse,</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>27 When she had heard of Jesus,
came in the press behind, and touched
his garment:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>28 For she said, If I may touch but
his clothes, I shall be whole.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>29 And straightway the fountain of
her blood was dried up; and she felt
in <hi rend='italic'>her</hi> body that she was healed of
that plague.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>30 And Jesus, immediately knowing
in himself that virtue had gone
out of him, turned him about in the
press, and said, Who touched my
clothes?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31 And his disciples said unto him,
Thou seest the multitude thronging
thee, and sayest thou, Who touched
me?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>32 And he looked round about to
see her that had done this thing.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>33 But the woman, fearing and
trembling, knowing what was done in
her, came and fell down before him,
and told him all the truth.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>34 And he said unto her, Daughter,
thy faith hath made thee whole; go in
peace, and be whole of thy plague.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35 While he yet spake, there came
from the ruler of the synagogue's
<hi rend='italic'>house certain</hi> which said, Thy daughter
is dead: why troublest thou the
Master any further?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>36 As soon as Jesus heard the word
that was spoken, he saith unto the
ruler of the synagogue, Be not afraid,
only believe.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>37 And he suffered no man to follow
him, save Peter, and James, and
John the brother of James.</cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And when Jesus came into the
ruler's house, and saw the minstrels
and the people making a noise,</cell><cell>38 And he cometh to the house of
the ruler of the synagogue, and seeth
the tumult, and them that wept and wailed greatly.</cell></row>
<row><cell>24 He said unto them, Give place:
for the maid is not dead, but sleepeth.
And they laughed him to scorn.</cell><cell>39 And when he was come in, he
saith unto them, Why make ye this
ado, and weep? the damsel is not
dead, but sleepeth.</cell></row>
<row><cell>25 But when the people were put
forth, he went in, and took her by the
hand, and the maid arose.</cell><cell>40 And they laughed him to scorn.
But, when he had put them all out,
he taketh the father and the mother of
the damsel, and them that were with
him, and entereth in where the damsel
was lying.</cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And the fame hereof went
abroad into all that land.</cell><cell>41 And he took the damsel by the
hand, and said unto her, Talitha-cumi:
which is, being interpreted, Damsel,
(I say unto thee) arise.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>42 And straightway the damsel
arose, and walked; for she was <hi rend='italic'>of the
age</hi> of twelve years. And they were
astonished with a great astonishment.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>43 And he charged them straitly
that no man should know it; and
commanded that something should be
given her to eat.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VIII. 41-56.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 And behold, there came a man
named Jairus, and he was a ruler of
the synagogue: and he fell down at
Jesus' feet, and besought him that
he would come into his house:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 For he had one only daughter,
about twelve years of age, and she lay
a-dying. But as he went, the people
thronged him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 And a woman having an issue
of blood twelve years, which had spent
all her living upon physicians, neither
could be healed of any,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 Came behind <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> and touched
the border of his garment: and immediately
her issue of blood stanched.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 And Jesus said, Who touched
me? When all denied, Peter, and
they that were with him, said, Master,
the multitude throng thee, and press
<hi rend='italic'>thee</hi>, and sayest thou, Who touched
me?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46 And Jesus said, Somebody hath
touched me: for I perceive that virtue
is gone out of me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>47 And when the woman saw that
she was not hid, she came trembling,
and falling down before him, she declared
unto him before all the people
for what cause she had touched him,
and how she was healed immediately.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>48 And he said unto her, Daughter,
be of good comfort: thy faith hath
made thee whole; go in peace.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>49 While he yet spake, there cometh
one from the ruler of the <hi rend='italic'>synagogue's
house</hi>, saying to him, Thy
daughter is dead: trouble not the
Master.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>50 But when Jesus heard <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, he
answered him, saying, Fear not:
believe only, and she shall be made
whole.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>51 And when he came into the
house, he suffered no man to go in,
save Peter, and James, and John, and
the father and the mother of the
maiden.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>52 And all wept and bewailed her:
but he said, Weep not: she is not
dead, but sleepeth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>53 And they laughed him to scorn,
knowing that she was dead.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>54 And he put them all out, and
took her by the hand, and called, saying,
Maid, arise.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>55 And her spirit came again, and
she arose straightway: and he commanded
to give her meat.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>56 And her parents were astonished:
but he charged them that they
should tell no man what was done.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>

<div>
<head>§ 60. Two blind men healed,
and a dumb spirit cast out. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX.  27-34.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And when Jesus departed
thence, two blind men followed him,
crying, and saying, <hi rend='italic'>Thou</hi> son of
David, have mercy on us.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 And when he was come into
the house, the blind men came to
him: and Jesus saith unto them,
Believe ye that I am able to do this?
They said unto him, Yea, Lord.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 Then touched he their eyes,
saying, According to your faith, be it
unto you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And their eyes were opened;
and Jesus straitly charged them, saying,
See <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> no man know <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 But they, when they were departed,
spread abroad his fame in all
that country.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 As they went out, behold, they
brought to him a dumb man possessed
with a devil.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 And when the devil was cast
out, the dumb spake: and the multitudes
marvelled, saying, It was never
so seen in Israel.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 But the Pharisees said, He casteth
out devils, through the prince of
the devils.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>

<div>
<head>§ 61. Jesus again at Nazareth, and again rejected.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIII. 54-58.</cell><cell>CH. VI. 1-6.</cell></row>
<row><cell>54 And when he was come into
his own country, he taught them in
their synagogue, insomuch that they
were astonished, and said, Whence
hath this <hi rend='italic'>man</hi> this wisdom, and <hi rend='italic'>these</hi>
mighty works?</cell><cell>And he went out from thence, and
came into his own county; and his disciples follow him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>55 Is not this the carpenter's son?
is not his mother called Mary? and
his brethren, James, and Joses, and
Simon, and Judas?</cell><cell>2 And when the sabbath-day was
come, he began to teach in the synagogue:
and many hearing <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> were
astonished, saying, From whence hath
this <hi rend='italic'>man</hi> these things? and what wisdom
<hi rend='italic'>is</hi> this which is given unto him,
that even such mighty works are wrought by his hands?</cell></row>
<row><cell>56 And his sisters, are they not all
with us? Whence then hath this
<hi rend='italic'>man</hi> all these things?</cell><cell>3 Is not this the carpenter, the son
of Mary,<note place='foot'>Neither of the Evangelists expressly mentions the death
of Joseph; yet from all four of them it may indirectly be inferred to have happened
while Jesus was yet alive. Comp. Luke viii. 19, John ii. 12, and xix. 25-27. Such
harmony as this could not have been the effect of concert. See <hi rend='smallcaps'>Blunt's</hi> Veracity, &amp;c.
sect. i. 7.</note> the brother of James, and
Joses, and of Juda, and Simon? and
are not his sisters here with us? And
they were offended at him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>57 And they were offended in him.
But Jesus said unto them, A prophet
is not without honour, save in his own
country, and in his own house.</cell><cell>4 But Jesus said unto them, A
prophet is not without honour, but in
his own country, and among his own
kin, and in his own house.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5 And he could there do mighty
work, save that he laid his hands
upon a few sick folk, and healed <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell>58 And he did not many mighty
works there, because of their unbelief.</cell><cell>6 And he marvelled because of their
unbelief.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>

<div>
<head>§ 62. A third circuit in Galilee.
The Twelve instructed and sent forth. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX. 35-38. CH. X. 1, 5-42.</cell><cell>CH. VI. 6-13.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XI. 1.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 And Jesus went about all the
cities and villages, teaching in their
synagogues, and preaching the gospel
of the kingdom, and healing every
sickness, and every disease among the
people.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 But when he saw the multitudes,
he was moved with compassion on
them, because they fainted, and were
scattered abroad as sheep having no
shepherd.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 Then saith he unto his disciples,
The harvest truly <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> plenteous, but
the labourers <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> few.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 Pray ye therefore the Lord of
the harvest, that he will send forth
labourers into his harvest.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CHAP. X.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>And when he had called unto <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>
his twelve disciples, he gave them
power <hi rend='italic'>against</hi> unclean spirits, to cast
them out, and to heal all manner of
sickness, and all manner of disease.</cell><cell>7 And he called <hi rend='italic'>unto him</hi> the
twelve, and began to send them forth
by two and two, and gave them power over unclean spirits;</cell></row>
<row><cell>5 These twelve Jesus sent forth,
and commanded them, saying, Go not
into the way of the Gentiles, and into
<hi rend='italic'>any</hi> city of the Samaritans, enter ye
not.</cell><cell>8 And commanded them that they
should take nothing for <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> journey,
save a staff only; no scrip, no bread,
no money in <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> purse:</cell></row>
<row><cell>6 But go rather to the lost sheep of
the house of Israel.</cell><cell>9 But <hi rend='italic'>be</hi> shod with sandals; and
not put on two coats.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And as ye go, preach, saying,
The kingdom of heaven is at hand.</cell><cell>10 And he said unto them, In what
place soever ye enter into a house,
there abide till ye depart from that place.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8 Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers,
raise the dead, cast out devils: freely
ye have received, freely give.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 Provide neither gold, nor silver,
nor brass in your purses;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 Nor scrip for <hi rend='italic'>your</hi> journey,
neither two coats, neither shoes,<note place='foot'>Commentators have noted two inconsistent circumstances in
this section. In Matthew, <hi rend='italic'>shoes are</hi> forbidden; in Mark the Apostles are commanded
to be shod with <hi rend='italic'>sandals</hi>. But the true solution seems to be this, that the Apostles
should not furnish themselves with spare garments, and should wear the simplest covering
for their feet. <q>Non vult ullis rebus studiose comparatis onerari.</q> Beza. See
Newcome, in loc.</note> nor
yet staves: (for the workman is worthy
of his meat.)</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And into whatever city or
town ye shall enter, inquire who in it
is worthy; and there abide till ye go
thence.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And when ye come into a house,
salute it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And if the house be worthy, let
your peace come upon it: but if it be not
worthy, let your peace return to you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And whosoever shall not receive
you, nor hear your words, when ye
depart out of that house, or city, shake
off the dust of your feet.</cell><cell>11 And whosoever shall not receive you, nor
hear you, when ye depart thence, shake off the dust under your feet, for a testimony
against them. Verify, I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorrah in the day of judgment, then for that city.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15 Verily, I say unto you, It shall
be more tolerable for the land of
Sodom and Gomorrah, in the day of
judgment, than for that city.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 Behold, I send you forth as sheep
in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore
wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 But beware of men: for they
will deliver you up to the councils,
and they will scourge you in their
synagogues.<note place='foot'>The synagogues were used, not only for divine service,
but for holding courts of justice, especially for ecclesiastical affairs; and the lesser
punishments, such as whipping, were inflicted in the synagogue, immediately after sentence,
as the burning in the hand was formerly inflicted in England, upon praying the
benefit of clergy. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jennings</hi>, Ant. p. 376. Such an allusion as this would not be likely
to have been found in a work of fiction.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 And ye shall be brought before
governors and kings for my sake, for a
testimony against them and the Gentiles.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 But when they deliver you up,
take no thought how or what ye shall
speak, for it shall be given you in that
same hour what ye shall speak.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 For it is not ye that speak, but
the Spirit of your Father which speaketh
in you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And the brother shall deliver up
the brother to death, and the father
the child: and the children shall rise
up against <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> parents, and cause
them to be put to death.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And ye shall be hated of all men
for my name's sake: but he that endureth
to the end shall be saved.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 But when they persecute you in
this city, flee ye into another: for
verily I say unto you, Ye shall not
have gone over the cities of Israel till
the Son of man be come.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 The disciple is not above <hi rend='italic'>his</hi>
master, nor the servant above his lord.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 It is enough for the disciple that
he be as his master, and the servant
as his lord: if they have called the
master of the house Beelzebub, how
much more <hi rend='italic'>shall they call</hi> them of his
household?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 Fear them not therefore: for
there is nothing covered, that shall not
be revealed; and hid, that shall not
be known.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 What I tell you in darkness,
<hi rend='italic'>that</hi> speak ye in light: and what ye
hear in the ear, <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> preach ye upon
the house-tops.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 And fear not them which kill
the body, but are not able to kill the
soul: but rather fear him which is able
to destroy both soul and body in hell.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 Are not two sparrows sold for a
farthing? and one of them shall not
fall on the ground without your
Father.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 But the very hairs of your head
are all numbered.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 Fear ye not therefore, ye are of
more value than many sparrows.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 Whosoever therefore shall confess
me before men, him will I confess
also before my Father which is in
heaven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 But whosoever shall deny me
before men, him will I also deny before
my Father which is in heaven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 Think not that I am come to
send peace on earth; I came not to
send peace, but a sword.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 For I am come to set a man at
variance against his father, and the
daughter against her mother, and the
daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 And a man's foes <hi rend='italic'>shall be</hi> they
of his own household.<note place='foot'>Mic. vii. 6.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 He that loveth father or mother
more than me, is not worthy of me:
and he that loveth son or daughter
more than me, is not worthy of me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 And he that taketh not his cross,
and followeth after me, is not worthy
of me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 He that findeth his life shall
lose it: and he that loseth his life for
my sake, shall find it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 He that receiveth you, receiveth
me; and he that receiveth me, receiveth
him that sent me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 He that receiveth a prophet in
the name of a prophet, shall receive a
prophet's reward; and he that receiveth
a righteous man in the name of a
righteous man, shall receive a righteous
man's reward.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 And whosoever shall give to
drink unto one of these little ones, a
cup of cold <hi rend='italic'>water</hi> only, in the name of
a disciple, verily, I say unto you, he
shall in no wise lose his reward.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XI.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>And it came to pass when Jesus
had made an end of commanding his
twelve disciples, he departed thence to
teach and to preach in their cities.</cell><cell>And he went round about the
villages teaching.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>12 And they went out, and preached that men should repent.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13 And they cast out many devils, and anointed with oil many
that were sick, and healed them.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX. 1-6.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Then he called his twelve disciples
together, and gave them power and
authority over all devils, and to cure
diseases.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And he sent them to preach the
kingdom of God, and to heal the sick.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And he said unto them, Take
nothing for <hi rend='italic'>your</hi> journey, neither
staves, nor scrip, neither bread, neither
money; neither have two coats
apiece.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And whatsoever house ye enter
into, there abide, and thence depart.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And whosoever will not receive
you, when ye go out of that city,
shake off the very dust from your
feet for a testimony against them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And they departed, and went
through the towns, preaching the gospel,
and healing everywhere.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>

<div>
<head>§ 63. Herod holds Jesus to be John the Baptist,
whom he had just before beheaded. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee? Perea</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIV. 1, 2, 6-12.</cell><cell>CH. VI. 14-16, 21-29.</cell></row>
<row><cell>At that time Herod the tetrarch
heard of the fame of Jesus,</cell><cell>14 And king Herod heard <hi rend='italic'>of him</hi>,
(for his name was spread abroad,)
and he said, That John the Baptist
was risen from the dead, and therefore
mighty works do shew forth themselves in him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And said unto his servants,<note place='foot'>Matth. xiv. 2, <hi rend='italic'>unto his servants</hi>. Matthew alone mentions, and without any apparent
reason for such minuteness, that Herod addressed his remark to his <hi rend='italic'>servants</hi> it.
Luke, in the parallel passage, says he <hi rend='italic'>heard of all that was done by him</hi>; but by referring
to Luke viii. 3, and to Acts xiii. 1, we find that Christ had followers from
among the household of the very prince, with whom Herod was likely to converse on
a subject in which they were better informed than himself. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Blunt</hi>, Veracity, &amp;c.,
sec. i. 8.</note> This
is John the Baptist; he is risen from the dead; and therefore mighty works
do shew forth themselves in him.</cell><cell>15 Others said, That it is Elias.
And others said, That it is a prophet,
or as one of the prophets.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>16 But when Herod heard <hi rend='italic'>thereof</hi>,
he said, It is John, whom I beheaded:
he is risen from the dead.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6 But when Herod's birth-day was
kept,<note place='foot'>Here is a very natural passing allusion to what
we learn from Josephus was a settled custom in the family of Herod; namely, the
making of a feast on his birth-day, at which the officers of his government were guests.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Josephus</hi>, Ant. xix. vii. § 1.</note> the daughter of Herodias danced
before them, and pleased Herod.</cell><cell>21 And when a convenient day
was come, that Herod on his birth-day
made a supper to his lords, high
captains, and chief <hi rend='italic'>estates</hi> of Galilee:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22 And when the daughter of the
said Herodias came in, and danced,
and pleased Herod, and them that sat
with him, the king said unto the damsel,
Ask of me whatsoever thou wilt,
and I will give <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> thee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7 Whereupon he promised with an
oath to give her whatsoever she would
ask.</cell><cell>23 And he sware unto her, Whatsoever thou shalt ask of me, I will
give <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> thee, unto the half of my kingdom.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>24 And she went forth, and said
unto her mother, What shall I ask?
And she said, The head of John the
Baptist.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And she, being before instructed
of her mother, said, Give me here
John Baptist's head in a charger.</cell><cell>25 And she came in straightway
with haste unto the king, and asked,
saying, I will that thou give me, by
and by, in a charger, the head of John
the Baptist.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And the king was sorry: nevertheless
for the oath's sake, and them
which sat with him at meat, he commanded
<hi rend='italic'>it</hi> to be given <hi rend='italic'>her</hi>.</cell><cell>26 And the king was exceeding
sorry; <hi rend='italic'>yet</hi> for his oath's sake, and for
their sakes which sat with him, he
would not reject her.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And he sent, and beheaded John
in the prison.</cell><cell>27 And immediately the king sent
an executioner, and commanded his
head to be brought: and he went and
beheaded him in the prison;</cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And his head was brought in a
charger, and given to the damsel: and
she brought <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> to her mother.</cell><cell>28 And brought his head in a
charger, and gave it to the damsel;
and the damsel gave it to her mother.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And his disciples came, and took
up the body, and buried it, and went
and told Jesus.</cell><cell>29 And when his disciples heard
<hi rend='italic'>of it</hi>, they came and took up his
corpse, and laid it in a tomb.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX. 7-9.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 Now Herod the tetrarch heard
of all that was done by him: and he
was perplexed, because that it was
said of some, that John was risen
from the dead;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And of some, that Elias had appeared;
and of others, that one of the
old prophets was risen again.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And Herod said, John have I beheaded;
but who is this of whom I
hear such things? And he desired to
see him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>

<div>
<head>§ 64. The Twelve return. Jesus retires with them across the lake.
Five thousand are fed. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum. N. E. coast of the lake</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIV. 13-21.</cell><cell>CH. VI. 30-44.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13 When Jesus heard <hi rend='italic'>of it</hi>, he
departed thence by ship into a desert
place apart: and when the people had
heard <hi rend='italic'>thereof</hi>, they followed him on
foot out of the cities.</cell><cell>30 And the apostles gathered themselves
together unto Jesus, and told
him all things, both what they had
done, and what they had taught.</cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And Jesus went forth, and saw
a great multitude, and was moved
with compassion toward them, and he
healed their sick.</cell><cell>31 And he said unto them, Come
ye yourselves apart into a desert
place, and rest awhile: for there
were many coming and going,<note place='foot'>Mark incidentally mentions the great multitude
coming and going, and the purpose of Jesus to withdraw <hi rend='italic'>awhile</hi>. The occasion of
this great multitude of <hi rend='italic'>travellers</hi> is stated in the like incidental manner by John, vi. 4,
that the <hi rend='italic'>passover</hi> was nigh at hand; and hence, if Jesus withdrew awhile, the throng
would be drawn off towards Jerusalem. These undesigned coincidences tend to verify
both the narratives. Blunt, Veracity, &amp;c. sect. i. 13.</note> and
they had no leisure so much as to eat.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>32 And they departed into a desert
place by ship privately.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>33 And the people saw them departing,
and many knew him, and
ran afoot thither out of all cities, and
outwent them, and came together unto
him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>34 And Jesus, when he came out,
saw much people, and was moved
with compassion toward them, because
they were as sheep not having
a shepherd: and he began to teach
them many things.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And when it was evening his
disciples came to him, saying, This is
a desert place, and the time is now
past; send the multitude away, that
they may go into the villages, and buy
themselves victuals.</cell><cell>35 And when the day was now far
spent, his disciples came unto him,
and said, This is a desert place, and
now the time <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> far passed:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>36 Send them away, that they may
go into the country round about, and
into the villages, and buy themselves
bread: for they have nothing to eat.</cell></row>
<row><cell>16 But Jesus said unto them, They
need not depart; give ye them to eat.</cell><cell>37 He answered and said unto
them, Give ye them to eat. And
they say unto him, Shall we go and
buy two hundred pennyworth of bread,
and give them to eat?</cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And they say unto him, We
have here but five loaves, and two
fishes.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 He said, Bring them hither to
me.</cell><cell>38 He saith unto them, How many
loaves have ye? go and see. And
when they knew, they say, Five, and
two fishes.</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And he commanded the multitude
to sit down on the grass, and
took the five loaves, and the two
fishes, and looking up to heaven, he
blessed, and brake, and gave the
loaves to <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> disciples, and the disciples
to the multitude.</cell><cell>39 And he commanded them to
make all sit down by companies upon
the green grass.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>40 And they sat down in ranks, by
hundreds, and by fifties.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>41 And when he had taken the
five loaves, and the two fishes, he
looked up to heaven, and blessed,
and brake the loaves, and gave <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>
to his disciples to set before them;
and the two fishes divided he among
them all.</cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And they did all eat, and were
filled: and they took up of the fragments
that remained twelve baskets full.</cell><cell>42 And they did all eat, and were
filled.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>43 And they took up twelve baskets
full of the fragments, and of the fishes.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And they that had eaten were
about five thousand men, besides
women and children.</cell><cell>44 And they that did eat of the
loaves, were about five thousand men.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX. 10-17.</cell><cell>CH. VI. 1-14.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And the apostles, when they
were returned, told him all that they
had done. And he took them, and
went aside privately into a desert
place, belonging to the city called
Bethsaida.</cell><cell>After these things Jesus went over
the sea of Galilee, which is <hi rend='italic'>the sea</hi> of
Tiberias.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2 And a great multitude followed him,
because they saw his miracles which
he did on them that were diseased.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And the people, when they
knew <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, followed him: and he received
them, and spake unto them
of the kingdom of God, and healed
them that had need of healing.</cell><cell>3 And Jesus went up into a mountain,
and there he sat with his disciples.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>4 And the passover, a feast of the
Jews, was nigh.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5 When Jesus then lifted up his
eyes, and saw a great company come unto him, he saith unto Philip,<note place='foot'>Why Jesus addressed this question to Philip, and why
John mentioned so unimportant a fact, is not here explained. Nor does Luke indicate
any reason for his own statement of the place where this miracle was wrought, namely,
near Bethsaida. But John, in another place, (ch. i. 44,) with apparently as little reason,
gratuitously states that Philip was of Bethsaida; and this fact renders both the others
intelligible and significant. Jesus, intending to furnish bread for the multitude by a
miracle, first asked Philip, who belonged to the city and was perfectly acquainted with the
neighbourhood, whether bread could be procured there. His answer amounts to saying
that it was not possible. These slight circumstances, thus collected together, constitute
very cogent evidence of the veracity of the narrative, and evince the reality of the miracle
itself. See Blunt, Veracity, &amp;c. sect. i. 13.</note> Whence
shall we buy bread that these may eat?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>6 (And this he said to prove him:
for he himself knew what he would do.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And when the day began to
wear away, then came the twelve,
and said unto him, Send the multitude
away, that they may go into the
towns and country round about, and
lodge, and get victuals: for we are
here in a desert place.</cell><cell>7 Philip answered him, Two hundred
pennyworth of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one of them
may take a little.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>8 One of his disciples, Andrew,
Simon Peter's brother, saith unto him,</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>9 There is a lad here, which hath
five barley loaves, and two small fishes: but what are they among so many?</cell></row>
<row><cell>13 But he said unto them, Give ye
them to eat. And they said, We have
no more but five loaves and two fishes;
except we should go and buy meat for
all this people.</cell><cell>10 And Jesus said, Make the men
sit down. (Now there was much grass in the place.) So the men sat
down in number about five thousand.</cell></row>
<row><cell>14 (For they were about five thousand
men.) And he said to his disciples,
Make them sit down by fifties<note place='foot'>In Luke, Jesus commands that the people should be made
to sit down by <hi rend='italic'>fifties</hi>. In Mark it is said that they sat down <hi rend='italic'>by hundreds and by
fifties</hi>. Piscator, and Pearce, in a dissertation at the end of his comment on St. Paul's Epistles,
say that they sat an hundred in front, and fifty deep; which very satisfactorily solves the
seeming variation. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note> in
a company.</cell><cell>11 And Jesus took the loaves; and
when he had given thanks, he distributed
to the disciples, and the disciples
to them that were set down; and
likewise of the fishes, as much as they would.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And they did so, and made them
all sit down.</cell><cell>12 When they were filled, he said
unto his disciples, Gather up the fragments
that remain, that nothing be lost.</cell></row>
<row><cell>16 Then he took the five loaves,
and the two fishes, and looking up to
heaven, he blessed them, and brake,
and gave to the disciples to set before
the multitude.</cell><cell>13 Therefore they gathered them
together, and filled twelve baskets
with the fragments of the five barley
loaves, which remained over and above
unto them that had eaten.</cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And they did eat, and were all
filled: and there was taken up of
fragments that remained to them
twelve baskets.</cell><cell>14 Then those men, when they had
seen the miracle that Jesus did, said,
This is of a truth that Prophet that
should come into the world.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>

<div>
<head>§ 65. Jesus walks upon the water.
<hi rend='italic'>Lake of Galilee. Gennesaret</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Ch. XIV. 22-36.</cell><cell>CH. VI. 45-56.</cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And straightway Jesus constrained
his disciples to get into a
ship, and to go before him unto the
other side, while he sent the multitudes
away.</cell><cell>45 And straightway he constrained
his disciples to get into the ship, and
to go to the other side before unto
Bethsaida, while he sent away the people.</cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And when he had sent the
multitudes away, he went up into a
mountain apart to pray: and when
the evening was come, he was there
alone.</cell><cell>46 And when he had sent them
away, he departed into a mountain to pray.</cell></row>
<row><cell>24 But the ship was now in the
midst of the sea, tossed with waves:
for the wind was contrary.</cell><cell>47 And when even was come, the
ship was in the midst of the sea, and
he alone on the land.</cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And in the fourth watch of the
night Jesus went unto them, walking
on the sea.</cell><cell>48 And he saw them toiling in
rowing; for the wind was contrary
unto them: and about the fourth
watch of the night he cometh unto
them, walking upon the sea, and
would have passed by them.</cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And when the disciples saw
him walking on the sea, they were
troubled, saying, It is a spirit; and
they cried out for fear.</cell><cell>49 But when they saw him walking
upon the sea, they supposed it
had been a spirit, and cried out.</cell></row>
<row><cell>27 But straightway Jesus spake
unto them, saying, Be of good cheer;
it is I; be not afraid.</cell><cell>50 (For they all saw him, and
were troubled.) And immediately
he talked with them, and saith unto
them, Be of good cheer: it is I; be
not afraid.</cell></row>
<row><cell>28 And Peter answered him and
said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come
unto thee on the water.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And he said, Come. And when
Peter was come down out of the ship,
he walked on the water, to go to
Jesus.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 But when he saw the wind
boisterous, he was afraid; and beginning
to sink, he cried, saying, Lord,
save me.</cell><cell>51 And he went up unto them into
the ship; and the wind ceased; and
they were sore amazed in themselves
beyond measure, and wondered.</cell></row>
<row><cell>31 And immediately Jesus stretched
forth <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> hand, and caught him, and
said unto him, O thou of little faith,
wherefore didst thou doubt?</cell><cell>52 For they considered not <hi rend='italic'>the
miracle</hi> of the loaves; for their heart
was hardened.</cell></row>
<row><cell>32 And when they were come into
the ship, the wind ceased.</cell><cell>53 And when they had passed over,
they came into the land of Gennesaret,
and drew to the shore.</cell></row>
<row><cell>33 Then they that were in the ship
came and worshipped him, saying, Of
a truth thou art the Son of God.</cell><cell>54 And when they were come out
of the ship, straightway they knew
him,</cell></row>
<row><cell>34 And when they were gone over,
they came into the land of Gennesaret.</cell><cell>55 And ran through that whole
region round about, and began to carry
about in beds those that were sick,
where they heard he was.</cell></row>
<row><cell>35 And when the men of that place
had knowledge of him, they sent out
into all that country round about,
and brought unto him all that were
diseased;</cell><cell>56 And whithersoever he entered,
into villages, or cities, or country,
they laid the sick in the streets, and
besought him that they might touch,
if it were but the border of his garment:
and as many as touched him
were made whole.</cell></row>
<row><cell>36 And besought him that they
might only touch the hem of his garment:
and as many as touched him were
made perfectly whole.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VI. 15-21.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>When Jesus therefore perceived
that they would come and take him
by force, to make him a king, he departed again into a mountain himself
alone.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And when even was <hi rend='italic'>now</hi> come,
his disciples went down unto the sea,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And entered into a ship, and
went over the sea toward Capernaum.
And it was now dark, and Jesus was
not come to them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 And the sea arose by reason of
a great wind that blew.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 So when they had rowed about
five and twenty or thirty furlongs,
they see Jesus walking on the sea,
and drawing nigh unto the ship: and
they were afraid.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 But he saith unto them, It is I;
be not afraid.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 Then they willingly received
him into the ship: and immediately
the ship was at the land whither they
went.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>

<div>
<anchor id='Section_66'/>
<head>§ 66. Our Lord's discourse in the Synagogue at Capernaum.
Many disciples turn back. Peter's profession of faith. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VI. 22-71. CH. VII. 1.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 The day following, when the
people which stood on the other side
of the sea saw that there was none
other boat there, save that one whereinto
his disciples were entered, and
that Jesus went not with his disciples
into the boat, but <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> his disciples
were gone away alone;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 (Howbeit there came other boats
from Tiberias nigh unto the place
where they did eat bread, after that
the Lord had given thanks:)</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 When the people therefore saw
that Jesus was not there, neither his
disciples, they also took shipping, and
came to Capernaum, seeking for
Jesus.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And when they had found him
on the other side of the sea, they said
unto him, Rabbi, when camest thou
hither?<note place='foot'>This seemingly idle inquiry becomes
important as a note of veracity in the narrator, when compared with the account of
Matthew. John indeed tells us, v. 18, that the wind blew a gale, but he does not state
from what quarter. He also says that there were boats from Tiberias, near the place
where the miracle of bread was wrought, v. 23, but this does not at all explain the
inquiry of the people how Jesus came to Capernaum. But Matthew states that <q>the wind
was contrary,</q> that is, west, Matth. xiv. 22. This fact, and the geographical position of
the places, explains the whole. The miracle was wrought near Bethsaida, on the east side
of the lake. The people saw the disciples take the only boat which was there, and
depart for Capernaum, which was on the west side of the lake, and saw that Jesus was not
with them. In the night it blew a tempest from the west. In the morning, the storm
being over, the people crossed over to Capernaum and found Jesus already there. Well
might they ask him, with astonishment, how he came thither. For though there were
boats over from Tiberias, which was also on the west side of the lake, yet he could not
have returned in one of them, for the wind would not have permitted them to cross the
lake.  <hi rend='smallcaps'>Blunt</hi>, Veracity of the Gospels, sect. i. 17.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 Jesus answered them and said,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, Ye
seek me, not because ye saw the
miracles, but because ye did eat of
the loaves, and were filled.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 Labour not for the meat which
perisheth, but for that meat which
endureth unto everlasting life, which
the Son of man shall give unto you:
for him hath God the Father sealed.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 Then said they unto him, What
shall we do, that we might work the
works of God?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 Jesus answered and said unto
them, This is the work of God, that
ye believe on him whom he hath
sent.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 They said therefore unto him,
What sign shewest thou then, that
we may see, and believe thee? what
dost thou work?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 Our fathers did eat manna in the
desert; as it is written,<note place='foot'>Ps. lxxviii. 24. Ex. xvi. 15.</note> He gave
them bread from heaven to eat.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 Then Jesus said unto them,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses
gave you not that bread from heaven;
but my Father giveth you the true
bread from heaven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 For the bread of God is he
which cometh down from heaven, and
giveth life unto the world.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 Then said they unto him, Lord,
evermore give us this bread.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 And Jesus said unto them, I am
the bread of life: he that cometh to
me, shall never hunger; and he that
believeth on me, shall never thirst.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 But I said unto you, That ye
also have seen me, and believe not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 All that the Father giveth me,
shall come to me; and him that cometh
to me, I will in no wise cast out.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 For I came down from heaven,
not to do mine own will, but the will
of him that sent me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 And this is the Father's will
which hath sent me, that of all which
he hath given me, I should lose
nothing, but should raise it up again
at the last day.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 And this is the will of him that
sent me, that every one which seeth
the Son, and believeth on him, may
have everlasting life: and I will raise
him up at the last day.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 The Jews then murmured at
him, because he said, I am the bread
which came down from heaven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 And they said, Is not this Jesus
the son of Joseph, whose father and
mother we know? how is it then that
he saith, I came down from heaven?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 Jesus therefore answered and
said unto them, Murmur not among
yourselves.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 No man can come to me, except
the Father which hath sent me draw
him: and I will raise him up at the
last day.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 It is written in the prophets,<note place='foot'> Isa. liv. 13. Jer. xxxi. 33, seq.</note>
And they shall be all taught of God.
Every man therefore that hath heard,
and hath learned of the Father, cometh
unto me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46 Not that any man hath seen the
Father, save he which is of God, he
hath seen the Father.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>47 Verily, verily, I say unto you,
He that believeth on me hath everlasting
life.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>48 I am that bread of life.<note place='foot'>Ex. xvi. 15.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>49 Your fathers did eat manna in
the wilderness, and are dead.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>50 This is the bread which cometh
down from heaven, that a man may
eat therof, and not die.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>51 I am the living bread which
came down from heaven: if any man
eat of this bread, he shall live for
ever: and the bread that I will give
is my flesh, which I will give for the
life of the world.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>52 The Jews therefore strove among
themselves, saying, How can this man
give us <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> flesh to eat?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>53 Then Jesus said unto them,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except
ye eat the flesh of the Son of man,
and drink his blood, ye have no life in
you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>54 Whoso eateth my flesh, and
drinketh my blood, hath eternal life;
and I will raise him up at the last
day.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>55 For my flesh is meat indeed,
and my blood is drink indeed.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>56 He that eateth my flesh, and
drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me,
and I in him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>57 As the living Father hath sent
me, and I live by the Father: so he
that eateth me, even he shall live by
me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>58 This is that bread which came
down from heaven: not as your fathers
did eat manna, and are dead: he
that eateth of this bread shall live for
ever.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>59 These things said he in the synagogue,
as he taught in Capernaum.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>60 Many therefore of his disciples,
when they had heard <hi rend='italic'>this</hi>, said, This
is a hard saying; who can hear it?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>
61 When Jesus knew in himself
that his disciples murmured at it, he
said unto them, Doth this offend you?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>62 <hi rend='italic'>What</hi> and if ye shall see the
Son of man ascend up where he was
before?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>63 It is the Spirit that quickeneth;
the flesh profiteth nothing: the words
that I speak unto you, <hi rend='italic'>they</hi> are spirit,
and <hi rend='italic'>they</hi> are life.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>64 But there are some of you that
believe not. For Jesus knew from
the beginning who they were that
believe not, and who should betray
him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>65 And he said, Therefore said I
unto you, that no man can come unto
me, except it were given unto him of
my Father.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>66 From that <hi rend='italic'>time</hi> many of his disciples
went back,<note place='foot'>The truth of the Gospels has been argued from the <hi rend='italic'>confessions</hi>
they contain. On this verse Paley asks, <q>Was it the part of a writer, who dealt in
suppression and disguise, to put down <hi rend='italic'>this</hi> anecdote?</q> <hi rend='italic'>Evid.</hi> 255.</note> and walked no more
with him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>67 Then said Jesus unto the twelve,
Will ye also go away?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>68 Then Simon Peter answered
him, Lord, to whom shall we go?
thou hast the words of eternal life.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>69 And we believe, and are sure
that thou art that Christ, the Son of
the living God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>70 Jesus answered them, Have not
I chosen you twelve, and one of you
is a devil?<note place='foot'>The admission of Judas Iscariot into the domestic and confidential
circle of our Lord, was the result of profound and even of divine wisdom. It
showed that Jesus was willing to throw open his most secret actions, discourses, and
views not merely to his devoted friends, but to a sagacious and hardened enemy. If Judas had
ever discovered the least fault in the character or conduct of Jesus, he certainly would
have disclosed it;&mdash;he would not have publicly confessed that he had betrayed innocent
blood, and have sunk down in insupportable anguish and despair. See <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tappin's</hi> Lect. on
Eccl. Hist. ii.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>71 He spake of Judas Iscariot <hi rend='italic'>the
son</hi> of Simon: for he it was that
should betray him, being one of the
twelve.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VII.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>After these things Jesus walked
in Galilee: for he would not walk in
Jewry, because the Jews sought to
kill him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part V. From Our Lord's Third Passover, Until His Final Departure From Galilee,
At The Festival Of Tabernacles.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Time.</hi>  <hi rend='italic'>Six months</hi>.
</p>

<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>

<div>
<head>§ 67. Our Lord justifies his Disciples for eating with
unwashen hands. Pharisaic traditions. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XV. 1-20.</cell><cell>CH. VII. 1-23.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Then came to Jesus scribes and
Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem,
saying,</cell><cell>Then came together unto him the
Pharisees, and certain of the scribes,
which came from Jerusalem.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 Why do thy disciples transgress
the tradition of the elders?<note place='foot'><p>The traditions of the elders were unwritten
ordinances of indefinite antiquity, the principal of which, as the Pharisees alleged, were
delivered to Moses in the mount, and all of which were transmitted through the High
Priests and Prophets, down to the members of the great Sanhedrim in their own times;
and from these, as the Jews say, they were handed down to Gamaliel, and ultimately to
Rabbi Jehudah, by whom they were digested and committed to writing, toward the close
of the second century. This collection is termed the Mishna; and in many cases
it is esteemed among the Jews as of higher authority than the law itself. In like manner,
there are said to be many Christians, at the present day, who receive ancient traditionary
usages and opinions as authoritative exponents of Christian doctrine. They say that the
preached gospel was before the written gospel; and that the testimony of those who heard
it is entitled to equal credit with the written evidence of the Evangelists; especially as the
latter is but a brief record, while the oral preaching was a more full and copious announcement
of the glad tidings.
</p>
<p>
These traditions, both of the Jewish and the Christian Church, seem to stand <hi rend='italic'>in pari
ratione</hi>, the arguments in favour of the admissibility and effect of the one, applying with
the same force, in favour of the other. All these arguments may be resolved into
two grounds, namely, contemporaneous practice subsequently and uniformly continued;
and contemporaneous declarations, as part of the <hi rend='italic'>res gestæ</hi>, faithfully transmitted to
succeeding times. It is alleged that those to whom the law of God was first announced,
best knew its precise import and meaning, and that therefore their interpretation and practice,
coming down concurrently with the law itself, is equally obligatory.
</p>
<p>
But this argument assumes what cannot be admitted; for it still remains to be shown
that those who first heard the law, when orally announced, had any better means
of understanding it than those to whom the same words were afterwards read. The
Ten Commandments were spoken in the hearing of Aaron and all the congregation
of Israel; immediately after which they made and worshipped a golden calf. Surely
this will not be adduced as a valid contemporaneous exposition of the second commandment.
The error of the argument lies in the nature of the subject. The human
doctrine of contemporaneous exposition is applicable only to human laws and the transactions
of men, as equals, and not to the laws of God. Among men, when <hi rend='italic'>their own</hi>
language is doubtful and ambiguous, <hi rend='italic'>their own</hi> practice is admissible, to expound it;
because both the language and the practice are but the outward and visible signs of the
meaning and intention of one and the same mind and will, which inward meaning and
intention is the thing sought after. It is on the same ground, that, where a statute,
capable of divers interpretations, has uniformly been acted upon in a certain way, this is
held a sufficient exposition of its true intent. In both cases it is the conduct of <hi rend='italic'>the parties</hi>
themselves which is admitted to interpret their own language; expressed, in cases of
contract, by themselves in person, and in statutes, through the medium of the legislators,
who were their agents and representatives; and in both cases, it is merely the interpretation
of what a man says, by what he does. But this rule has never been applied, in the
law, to the language of any other person than the party himself; never, to the command
or direction of his superior or employer. And even the language of the <hi rend='italic'>parties</hi>, when it
is contained in a sealed instrument, is at this day held incapable of being expounded
by their actions, on account of the greater solemnity of the instrument. See Baynham <hi rend='italic'>v</hi>.
Guy's Hospital, 3 Vesey's Rep. 295. Eaton <hi rend='italic'>v</hi>. Lyon, Ibid. 690, 694. The practice
of men, therefore, can be no just exponent of the law of God. If they have mistaken the
meaning of his command from the beginning, the act of contravention remains a sin in the
last transgressor, as well as the first; for the word of God cannot be changed or affected
by the gloss of human interpretation.
</p>
<p>
The other ground, namely, that the testimony of those who heard Jesus and his
apostles preach, is of equal authority with the Scriptures, being contemporaneous declarations,
and parts of the <hi rend='italic'>res gestae</hi>, and therefore admissible in aid of the exposition of
the written word, is equally inconsistent with the sound and settled rules of law respecting
writings. When a party has deliberately committed his intention and meaning to writing,
the law regards the writing as the sole repository of his mind and intention, and does not
admit any oral testimony to alter, add to, or otherwise affect it. The reasons for this rule
are two; first, because the writing is the more solemn act, by the party himself, designed
to prevent mistake, and to remain as the perpetual memorial of his intention; and,
secondly, because of the great uncertainty and weakness of any secondary evidence. For
no one can tell whether the by-standers heard precisely what was said, nor whether they
heard it all, nor whether they continued to remember it with accuracy until the time
when they wrote it down, or communicated it to those who wrote it; to say nothing of
the danger of their mixing up the language of the speaker with what was said by others,
or with their own favourite theories. And where the witnesses were not the original
auditors of what was said, no one knows how much the truth may have suffered from the
many channels through which it has passed, in coming from the first speaker to the
last write or witness. On all these accounts, the law rejects oral testimony of what the
parties said, in regard to anything that has already been solemnly committed to writing by
the parties themselves, and rejects the secondary evidence of hearsay, when evidence of a
higher degree, as, for example, a written declaration of the party, can be obtained.
</p>
<p>
Now, inasmuch as the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles were penned under the
inspiration of the Holy Spirit, why should not the documentary evidence of the Gospel,
thus drawn up by them, be treated with at least as much respect as other written documents?
If they were inspired to write down those great truths for a perpetual memorial to
after ages, then this record is the primary evidence of those truths. It is the word of God,
penned by his own dictation, and sealed, as it were, with his own seal. If it were a man's
word and will, thus solemnly written, no verbal or secondary evidence could be admitted,
by the common law, to explain, add to, or vary it; nothing could be engrafted upon it;
nor could any person be admitted to testify what he heard the party say, in regard to what
was written. The courts would at once reject all such attempts, and confine themselves
strictly to the writing before them, the only inquiry being as to the meaning of the
language contained in that document, and not as to what the party may elsewhere have
spoken. The law presumes that the writing alone is the source to which he intended
that resort should be had, in order to ascertain his meaning. But by calling in the
fathers, with their traditions, to prove what Christ and his Apostles taught, beyond what
is solemnly recorded in the Scriptures, the principle of this plain and sound rule of law is
violated; resort is had to secondary evidence of the truths of our religion, when the
primary evidence is already at hand; and the pure fountain is deserted for the muddy
stream.</p></note> for they
wash not their hands when they eat
bread.</cell><cell>2 And when they saw some of his
disciples eat bread with defiled (that
is to say, with unwashen) hands, they
found fault.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>3 For the Pharisees, and all the
Jews, except they wash <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> hands
oft, eat not, holding the tradition of
the elders.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>4 And <hi rend='italic'>when they come</hi> from the
market, except they wash, they eat
not. And many other things there be,
which they have received to hold, as
the washing of cups, and pots, and
brazen vessels, and tables.<note place='foot'>Matthew was not only a Jew himself, but it is evident, from the
whole structure of his Gospel, especially from his numerous references to the Old Testament, that he wrote for Jewish readers.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Paley</hi>. But the explanation here given by
Mark is an additional evidence of the fact asserted by Jerome and Clement of Alexandria,
that he wrote at Rome, for the benefit chiefly of the converts of that nation.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5 Then the Pharisees and scribes
asked him, Why walk not thy disciples
according to the tradition of the
elders, but eat bread with unwashen
hands?</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 But he answered and said unto
them, Why do ye also transgress
the commandment of God by your
tradition?</cell><cell>6 He answered and said unto them,
Well hath Esaias prophesied of you
hypocrites, as it is written, This people
honoureth me with <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> lips, but
their heart is far from me.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4 For God commanded,<note place='foot'>Ex. xxii 12. Ex. xxi. 17. Deut. v. 16.</note> saying,
Honour thy father and mother: and,
He that curseth father or mother, let
him die the death.</cell><cell>7 Howbeit, in vain do they worship
me, teaching <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> doctrines the commandments
of men.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5 But ye say, Whosoever shall say
to <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> father or <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> mother, <hi rend='italic'>It is</hi> a
gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be
profited by me;</cell><cell>8 For, laying aside the commandment
of God, ye hold the tradition of
men, <hi rend='italic'>as</hi> the washing of pots and cups:
and many other such like things ye do.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And honour not his father or his
mother, <hi rend='italic'>he shall be free</hi>. Thus
ye made the commandment of God of
none effect by your tradition.</cell><cell>9 And he said unto them, Full well
ye reject the commandment of God,
that ye may keep your own tradition.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7 <hi rend='italic'>Ye</hi> hypocrites, well did Esaias
prophesy of you,<note place='foot'>Is. xxix. 13.</note>
saying,</cell><cell>10 For Moses said, Honour thy
father and thy mother; and, Whoso
curseth father or mother, let him die the death.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8 This people draweth nigh unto
me with their mouth, and honoureth
me with <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> lips; but their heart is
far from me.</cell><cell>11 But ye say, If a man shall say
to his father or mother, <hi rend='italic'>It is</hi> Corban,
that is to say, a gift, by whatsoever
thou mightest be profited by me; <hi rend='italic'>he
shall be free</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9 But in vain they do worship me,
teaching <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> doctrines the commandments
of men.</cell><cell>12 And ye suffer him no more to
do aught for his father or his mother;</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13 Making the word of God of
none effect through your tradition,
which ye have delivered: and many
such like things do ye.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And he called the multitude,
and said unto them, Hear, and understand:</cell><cell>14 And when he had called all the
people <hi rend='italic'>unto him</hi>, he said unto them,
Hearken unto me every one <hi rend='italic'>of you</hi>,
and understand.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11 Not that which goeth into the
mouth defileth a man; but that which
cometh out of the mouth, this defileth
a man.</cell><cell>15 There is nothing from without
a man, that entering into him, can
defile him: but the things which
come out of him, those are they that
defile the man.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 Then came his disciples, and
said unto him, Knowest thou that the
Pharisees were offended after they
heard this saying?</cell><cell>16 If any man have ears to hear,
let him hear.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13 But he answered and said, Ever
plant, which my heavenly Father hath
not planted, shall be rooted up.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 Let them alone: they be blind
leaders of the blind. And if the blind
lead the blind, both shall fall into the
ditch.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 Then answered Peter and said
unto him, Declare unto us this parable.</cell><cell>17 And when he was entered into
the house from the people, his disciples
asked him concerning the parable.</cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And Jesus said, Are ye also yet
without understanding?</cell><cell>18 And he saith unto them, Are ye
so without understanding also? Do
ye not perceive, that whatsoever thing
from without entereth into the man, <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>
cannot defile him:</cell></row>
<row><cell>17 Do not ye yet understand, that
whatsoever entereth in at the mouth
goeth into the belly, and is cast out
into the draught?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 But those things which proceed
out of the mouth come forth from the
heart; and they defile the man.</cell><cell>19 Because it entereth not into his
heart, but into the belly, and goeth
out into the draught, purging all meats?</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 For out of the heart proceed
evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false witness,
blasphemies:</cell><cell>20 And he said, That which cometh
heart of the man, that defileth the man.</cell></row>
<row><cell>20 These <hi rend='italic'>are the things</hi> which defile
a man: but to eat with unwashen
hands defileth not a man.</cell><cell>21 For from within, out of the
heart of men, proceed evil thoughts,
adulteries, fornications, murders,</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22 Thefts, covetousness, wickedness,
deceit, lasciviousness, an evil
eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness;</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>23 All these evil things come from
within, and defile the man.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>

<div>
<head>§ 68. The daughter of a Syrophenician woman
is healed. <hi rend='italic'>Region of Tyre and Sidon</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XV. 21-28.</cell><cell>CH. VII. 24-30.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21 Then Jesus went thence, and
departed into the coasts of Tyre and
Sidon.</cell><cell>24 And from thence he arose, and
went into the borders of Tyre and
Sidon, and entered into a house, and
would have no man know <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>: but he
could not be hid.</cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And behold, a woman of Canaan
came out of the same coasts,
and cried unto him, saying, Have
mercy on me, O Lord, <hi rend='italic'>thou</hi> son of
David; my daughter is grievously
vexed with a devil.</cell><cell>25 For a <hi rend='italic'>certain</hi> woman, whose
young daughter had an unclean spirit,
heard of him, and came and fell at his feet:</cell></row>
<row><cell>23 But he answered her not a
word. And his disciples came and
besought him, saying, Send her away;
for she crieth after us.</cell><cell>26 (The woman was a Greek, a
Syrophenician<note place='foot'>Mark designates the woman by the country where
she dwelt; Matthew calls her a woman of Canaan, because of the people to whom she
belonged. Thus they do not contradict each other. The treatment of this woman by
our Lord has been the subject of remark, as evasive and insincere. But it was far otherwise.
He had a twofold object; to call the attention of his disciples to the fact of
her being a foreigner, in order to show them that his ministry, though primarily and
chiefly to the Jews, was in truth designed for the benefit of the Gentiles also; and to
draw out, as it were, the great faith of the woman, in order to teach them the effect of
faithful and persevering supplication. To attain these objects, he took the direct and most
obvious method. In this instance also, as in those of the centurion, (Matth. viii. 5-13,)
and of the Samaritan leper, (Luke xvii. 16-18,) he indicated that the gospel would be
more readily received by the Gentiles than by the Jews. See <hi rend='smallcaps'>A. Clarke</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>in loc</hi>.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>, Obs. on our Lord. p. 165. Bp. Horsley's Sermons on this subject, Serm.
xxxvii. and xxxviii. p. 444-464.</note> by nation,) and she besought
him that he would cast forth
the devil out of her daughter.</cell></row>
<row><cell>24 But he answered and said, I
am not sent but unto the lost sheep
of the house of Israel.</cell><cell>27 But Jesus said unto her, Let the
children first be filled: for it is not
meet to take the children's bread, and
to cast it unto the dogs.</cell></row>
<row><cell>25 Then came she and worshipped
him, saying, Lord, help me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 But he answered and said, It is
not meet to take the children's bread
and to <hi rend='italic'>cast it</hi> to dogs.</cell><cell>28 And she answered and said
unto him, Yes, Lord: yet the dogs
under the table eat of the children's crumbs.</cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And she said, Truth, Lord: yet
the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall
from their master's table.</cell><cell>29 And he said unto her, For this
saying, go thy way; the devil is gone
out of thy daughter.</cell></row>
<row><cell>28 Then Jesus answered and said
unto her, O woman, great <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> thy
faith: be it unto thee even as thou
wilt. And her daughter was made
whole from that very hour.</cell><cell>30 And when she was come to her
house, she found the devil gone out,
and her daughter laid upon the bed.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>

<div>
<head>§ 69. A deaf and dumb man healed; also many others.
Four thousand are fed. <hi rend='italic'>The Decapolis</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XV. 29-38.</cell><cell>CH. VII. 31-37. CH. VIII. 1-9.</cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And Jesus departed from thence,
and came nigh unto the sea of Galilee;
and went up into a mountain, and
sat down there.</cell><cell>31 And again departing from the
coasts of Tyre and Sidon, he came
unto the sea of Galilee, through the
midst of the coasts of Decapolis.</cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And great multitudes came unto
him, having with them <hi rend='italic'>those that
were</hi> lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and
many others, and cast them down at
Jesus' feet; and he healed them:</cell><cell>32 And they bring unto him one
that was deaf, and had an impediment
in his speech; and they beseech him
to put his hand upon him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>33 And he took him aside from the
multitude, and put his fingers into
his ears, and he spit, and touched his
tongue:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>34 And looking up to heaven, he
sighed, and saith unto him, Ephphatha,
that is, Be opened.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35 And straightway his ears were
opened, and the string of his tongue
was loosed, and he spake plain.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>36 And he charged them that they
should tell no man: but the more
he charged them, so much the more a
great deal they published <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>;</cell></row>
<row><cell>31 Insomuch that the multitude
wondered, when they saw the dumb
to speak, the maimed to be whole, the
lame to walk, and the blind to see:
and they glorified the God of Israel.</cell><cell>37 And were beyond measure astonished,
saying, He hath done all
things well; he maketh both the deaf
to hear, and the dumb to speak.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>CH. VIII.</cell></row>
<row><cell>32 Then Jesus called his disciples
<hi rend='italic'>unto him</hi>, and said, I have compassion
on the multitude, because they continue
with me now three days, and
have nothing to eat: and I will not
send them away fasting, lest they
faint in the way.</cell><cell>In those days the multitude being
very great, and having nothing to eat,
Jesus called his disciples <hi rend='italic'>unto him</hi>,
and saith unto them,</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2 I have compassion on the multitude,
because they have now been
with me three days, and have nothing to eat:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>3 And if I send them away fasting
to their own houses, they will faint by
the way: for divers of them came
from far.</cell></row>
<row><cell>33 And his disciples say unto him,
Whence should we have so much
bread in the wilderness, as to fill so
great a multitude?</cell><cell>4 And his disciples answered him,
From whence can a man satisfy these
<hi rend='italic'>men</hi> with bread here in the wilderness?</cell></row>
<row><cell>34 And Jesus saith unto them, How
many loaves have ye? And they said,
Seven, and a few little fishes.</cell><cell>5 And he asked them, How many
loaves have ye? And they said, Seven.</cell></row>
<row><cell>35 And he commanded the multitude
to sit down on the ground.</cell><cell>6 And he commanded the people to
sit down on the ground: and he took
the seven loaves, and gave thanks,
and brake, and gave to his disciples to
set before <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>; and they did set
<hi rend='italic'>them</hi> before the people.</cell></row>
<row><cell>36 And he took the seven loaves
and the fishes, and gave thanks, and
brake <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>, and gave to his disciples,
and the disciples to the multitude.</cell><cell>7 And they had a few small fishes:
and he blessed, and commanded to set
them also before <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell>37 And they did all eat, and were
filled: and they took up of the broken
<hi rend='italic'>meat</hi> that was left seven baskets full.</cell><cell>8 So they did eat, and were filled:
and they took up of the broken <hi rend='italic'>meat</hi>
that was left, seven baskets.</cell></row>
<row><cell>38 And they that did eat were four
thousand men, besides women and
children.</cell><cell>9 And they that had eaten were
about four thousand: and he sent them away.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>

<div>
<head>§ 70. The Pharisees and Sadducees again
require a sign. <hi rend='italic'>Near Magdala.</hi></head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XV. 39. CH. XVI. 1-4.</cell><cell>CH. VIII. 10-12.</cell></row>
<row><cell>39 And he sent away the multitude,
and took ship, and came into
the coasts of Magdala.<note place='foot'>Cellarius and Lightfoot think that Dalmanutha and
Magdala were neighbouring towns. See Calmet, voc. Dalmanutha. It is probable that
Dalmanutha and Magdala were in Gaulanitis, towards the south-east part of the lake. See
Matth. xv. 21; Mark vii. 24. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note></cell><cell>10 And straightway he entered into
a ship with his disciples, and came
into the parts of Dalmanutha.</cell></row>
<row><cell>The Pharisees also with the Sadducees
came, and, tempting, desired
him that he would shew them a sign
from heaven.</cell><cell>11 And the Pharisees came forth,
and began to question with him, seeking
of him a sign from heaven, tempting him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 He answered and said unto
them, When it is evening, ye say, <hi rend='italic'>It
will be</hi> fair weather: for the sky is
red.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And in the morning, <hi rend='italic'>It will be</hi>
foul weather to-day: for the sky is
red and lowering. O <hi rend='italic'>ye</hi> hypocrites,
ye can discern the face of the sky;
but can ye not discern the signs of the
times?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 A wicked and adulterous generation
seeketh after a sign; and there
shall no sign be given unto it, but the
sign of the prophet Jonas.</cell><cell>12 And he sighed deeply in his
spirit, and saith, Why doth this generation
seek after a sign? Verily I
say unto you, There shall no sign be
given unto this generation.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>

<div>
<head>§ 71. The disciples cautioned against the leaven
of the Pharisees, &amp;c. <hi rend='italic'>N. E. coast of the lake of Galilee</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVI. 4-12.</cell><cell>CH. VIII. 13-21.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And he left them, and departed.</cell><cell>13 And he left them, and entering
into the ship again, departed to the other side.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And when his disciples were
come to the other side, they had forgotten
to take bread.</cell><cell>14 Now <hi rend='italic'>the disciples</hi> had forgotten
to take bread, neither had they in the
ship with them more than one loaf.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6 Then Jesus said unto them,
Take heed and beware of the leaven
of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.</cell><cell>15 And he charged them, saying,
Take heed, beware of the leaven of
the Pharisees, and <hi rend='italic'>of</hi> the leaven of
Herod.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And they reasoned among themselves,
saying, <hi rend='italic'>It is</hi> because we have
taken no bread.</cell><cell>16 And they reasoned among themselves,
saying, <hi rend='italic'>It is</hi> because we have
no bread.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8 <hi rend='italic'>Which</hi> when Jesus perceived, he
said unto them, O ye of little faith,
why reason ye among yourselves, because
ye have brought no bread?</cell><cell>17 And when Jesus knew <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, he
saith unto them, Why reason ye, because
ye have no bread? perceive ye
not yet, neither understand? have ye
your heart yet hardened?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18 Having eyes, see ye not? and
having ears, hear ye not? and do ye
not remember?</cell></row>
<row><cell>9 Do ye not yet understand, neither
remember the five loaves of the five
thousand, and how many baskets ye
took up?</cell><cell>19 When I brake the five loaves
among five thousand, how many baskets
full of fragments took ye up?
They say unto him, Twelve.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10 Neither the seven loaves of the
four thousand, and how many baskets
ye took up?</cell><cell>20 And when the seven among four
thousand, how many baskets full of
fragments took ye up? And they said,
Seven.<note place='foot'>Our Lord's words, Matth. xvi. 8, 10, and Mark viii. 17, 20, are
the same in substance, though differently modified. The evangelists are not scrupulous in
adhering to the precise words used by Christ. They often record them in a general
manner, non numerantes, sed tanquem appendentes; regarding their purport, and not
superstitiously detailing them. However, in this place, after uttering what Matthew
relates, Jesus may have asked the questions recorded by Mark. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome.</hi></note></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 How is it that ye do not understand
that I spake <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> not to you concerning
bread, that ye should beware
of the leaven of the Pharisees and of
the Sadducees?</cell><cell>21 And he said unto them, How is
it that ye do not understand?</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 Then understood they how that
he bade <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> not beware of the leaven
of bread, but of the doctrine of the
Pharisees and of the Sadducees.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>

<div>
<head>§ 72. A blind man healed.
<hi rend='italic'>Bethsaida. (Julias.)</hi></head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Mark.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VIII. 22-26.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And he cometh to Bethsaida;
and they bring a blind man unto him,
and besought him to touch him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And he took the blind man by
the hand, and led him out of the
town;<note place='foot'>The notice of this circumstance affords a proof of the
veracity of the evangelist; for he barely states a fact having no apparent connexion with
any other in his narrative. The reason of it is found in facts stated by the other evangelists. The people of Bethsaida had already witnessed the miracles of our Lord, but
these only served to increase their rage against him; and they were therefore abandoned
to the consequences of their of their unbelief. Matth. xi. 21.</note> and when he had spit on his
eyes, and put his hands upon him, he
asked him if he saw aught.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 And he looked up, and said, I
see men as trees walking.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 After that, he put <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> hands
again upon his eyes, and made him
look up: and he was restored, and
saw every man clearly.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And he sent him away to his
house, saying, Neither go into the
town, nor tell <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> to any in the town.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 73. Peter and the others again profess their
faith in Christ. <hi rend='italic'>Region of Cesarea Philippi</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVI. 13-20.</cell><cell>CH. VIII. 27-30.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13 When Jesus came into the
coasts of Cesarea Philippi, he asked
his disciples, saying, Whom do men
say that I, the Son of man, am?</cell><cell>27 And Jesus went out, and his
disciples, into the towns of Cesarea
Philippi: and by the way he asked
his disciples, saying unto them, Whom
do men say that I am?</cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And they said, Some <hi rend='italic'>say that
thou art</hi> John the Baptist: some,
Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of
the prophets.</cell><cell>28 And they answered, John the
Baptist: but some <hi rend='italic'>say</hi>, Elias; and
others, One of the prophets.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15 He saith unto them, But whom
say ye that I am?</cell><cell>29 And he saith unto them, But
whom say ye that I am? And Peter
answereth and saith unto him, Thou
art the Christ.</cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And Simon Peter answered and
said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of
the living God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And Jesus answered and said
unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon
Bar-jona: for flesh and blood hath
not revealed <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> unto thee, but my
Father which is in heaven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 And I say also unto thee, That
thou art Peter, and upon this rock I
will build my church: and the gates
of hell shall not prevail against it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And I will give unto thee the
keys of the kingdom of heaven: and
whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth,
shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever
thou shalt loose on earth, shall
be loosed in heaven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 Then charged he his disciples
that they should tell no man that he
was Jesus the Christ.</cell><cell>30 And he charged them that they
should tell no man of him.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX. 18-21.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 And it came to pass, as he was
alone praying, his disciples were with
him; and he asked them, saying,
Whom say the people that I am?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 They, answering, said, John the
Baptist; but some <hi rend='italic'>say</hi>, Elias; and
others say, That one of the old prophets
is risen again.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 He said unto them, But whom
say ye that I am? Peter, answering,
said, The Christ of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>

<div>
<anchor id='Section_74'/>
<head>§ 74. Our Lord foretells his own death and resurrection,
and the trials of his followers. <hi rend='italic'>Region of Cesarea Philippi</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVI. 21-28.</cell><cell>CH. VIII. 31-38. CH. IX. 1.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21 From that time forth began
Jesus to shew unto his disciples, how
that he must go unto Jerusalem, and
suffer many things of the elders, and
chief priests, and scribes, and be
killed, and be raised again the third
day.<note place='foot'><p>The phrase <hi rend='italic'>three days and three nights</hi> is equivalent
to <hi rend='italic'>three days</hi>, three natural days of twenty-four hours. Gen. i. 5; Dan. viii. 14. Comp.
Gen. vii. 4. 17.
</p>
<p>
(It is a received rule among the Jews, <hi rend='italic'>that a part of a day is put for the whole</hi>; so
that whatsoever is done in any part of the day, is properly said to be done that day.
1 Kings xx. 29; Esth. iv. 16. <q>When eight days were accomplished for the circumcision
of the child,</q> &amp;c. Yet the day of his birth and of his circumcision were two of these
eight days. <hi rend='italic'>Whitby</hi>, quoted by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Scott</hi>, on Matth. xii. 40.)
Grotius establishes this way of reckoning the <hi rend='italic'>parts</hi> of the first and third days for <hi rend='italic'>two
days</hi>, by Aben Ezra on Lev. xii. 3.
</p>
<p>
(In proof that the phrase <q><hi rend='italic'>after three days,</hi></q> is sometimes equivalent to <q><hi rend='italic'>on the third
day,</hi></q> compare Deut. xiv. 28 with xxvi. 12; 1 Sam. xx. 12 with v. 19; 2 Chron. x. 5
with v. 12; Matth. xxvi. 2 with xxvii. 63, 64; Luke ii. 21 with i. 59.)
</p>
<p>
St. Luke omits our Lord's sharp reproof of Peter, and the occasion of it; though he
records the discourse in consequence of it. Le Clerc's 12th canon is <q>Qui pauciora
habet, non negat plura dicta aut facta; modo ne ulla sit exclusionis nota.</q> Perhaps the
disciple and companion of that apostle who had withstood Peter to his face, Gal. ii. 11,
willingly made this omission, as he omits some aggravating circumstances in Peter's denial
of Christ, Luke xxii. 60, though he carefully records the greatness of his sorrow, v. 62.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</p></note></cell><cell>31 And he began to teach them,
that the Son of man must suffer many
things, and be rejected of the elders,
and <hi rend='italic'>of</hi> the chief priests, and scribes,
and be killed, and after three days
rise again.</cell></row>
<row><cell>22 Then Peter took him, and began
to rebuke him, saying, Be it far
from thee, Lord: this shall not be
unto thee.</cell><cell>32 And he spake that saying openly
And Peter took him, and began
to rebuke him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>23 But he turned, and said unto
Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan;
thou art an offence unto me: for thou
savourest not the things that be of
God, but those that be of men.</cell><cell>33 But when he had turned about,
and looked on his disciples, he rebuked
Peter, saying, Get thee behind me,
Satan: for thou savourest not the
things that be of God, but the things
that be of men.</cell></row>
<row><cell>24 Then said Jesus unto his disciples
If any <hi rend='italic'>man</hi> will come after me,
let him deny himself, and take up his
cross, and follow me.</cell><cell>34 And when he had called the
people <hi rend='italic'>unto him</hi>, with his disciples
also, he said unto them, Whosoever
will come after me, let him deny himself,
and take up his cross, and follow me.</cell></row>
<row><cell>25 For whosoever will save his life,
shall lose it: and whosoever will lose
his life for my sake, shall find it.</cell><cell>35 For whosoever will save his
life, shall lose it; but whosoever shall
lose his life for my sake and the gospel's,
the same shall save it.</cell></row>
<row><cell>26 For what is a man profited, if
he shall gain the whole world, and
lose his own soul? or what shall a
man give in exchange for his soul?</cell><cell>36 For what shall it profit a man,
if he shall gain the whole world, and
lose his own soul?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>37 Or what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul?</cell></row>
<row><cell>27 For the Son of man shall come
in the glory of his Father, with his
angels; and then he shall reward
every man according to his works.</cell><cell>38 Whosoever therefore shall be
ashamed of me, and of my words, in
this adulterous and sinful generation,
of him also shall the Son of man be
ashamed, when he cometh in the
glory of his Father with the holy angels.</cell></row>
<row><cell>28 Verily I say unto you, There
be some standing here, which shall
not taste of death, till they see the
Son of man coming in his kingdom.</cell><cell>1 And he said unto them, Verily, I
say unto you, That there be some of
them that stand here which shall not
taste of death, till they have seen the
kingdom of God come with power.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX. 22-27.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 Saying, The Son of man must
suffer many things, and be rejected
of the elders, and chief priests, and
scribes, and be slain, and be raised
the third day.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And he said to <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> all, If any
<hi rend='italic'>man</hi> will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross daily,
and follow me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 For whosoever will save his life,
shall lose it: but whosoever will lose
his life for my sake, the same shall
save it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 For what is a man advantaged,
if he gain the whole world, and lose
himself, or be cast away?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 For whosoever shall be ashamed
of me, and of my words, of him shall
the Son of man be ashamed, when he
shall come in his own glory, and <hi rend='italic'>in
his</hi> Father's, and of the holy angels.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 But I tell you of a truth, there
be some standing here which shall
not taste of death till they see the
Kingdom of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>

<div>
<head>§ 75. The Transfiguration. Our Lord's subsequent discourse.
with the three disciples. <hi rend='italic'>Region of Cesarea Philippi</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVII. 1-13.</cell><cell>CH. IX. 2-13.</cell></row>
<row><cell>And after six days,<note place='foot'><p>It has been shown, § 74, that <q><hi rend='italic'>after six days</hi></q> may
signify on the sixth day. But we are not hence to conclude that the phrase has <emph>always</emph>
such a signification. Here it means six days complete, after the discourse recorded in
§ 74. The eight days mentioned by St. Luke include that of Peter's reproof and of
the transfiguration; which two days Matthew and Mark exclude. Macknight furnishes us
with the following apposite reference to Tacitus: Hist. i. 29. Piso says, <hi rend='italic'>Sextus dies
agitur&mdash;ex quo&mdash;Cæsar adscitus sum;</hi> and yet, § 48 of the same book, Tacitus speaks of
Piso as <hi rend='italic'>quatriduo Cæsar</hi>.
</p>
<p>
Grotius on Matth. xvii. 1, has another solution; Quod Lucas dicit, tale est quale cum
vulgò dicimus <hi rend='italic'>post septimanam circiter. Nam Judæos octo dies</hi> appellasse id quod ab
uno sabbato est ad alterum apparet, Joan. 20, 26, &amp;c. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</p></note> Jesus taketh
Peter, James, and John his brother,
and bringeth them up into a high
mountain apart.</cell><cell>2 And after six days, Jesus taketh
<hi rend='italic'>with him</hi> Peter, and James, and John,
and leadeth them up into a high mountain
apart by themselves; and he was
transfigured before them.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And was transfigured before
them: and his face did shine as the
sun, and his raiment was white as the
light.</cell><cell>3 And his raiment became shining,
exceeding white as snow; so as no
fuller on earth can white them.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And behold there appeared unto
them Moses and Elias talking with
him.</cell><cell>4 And there appeared unto them
Elias, with Moses: and they were
talking with Jesus.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4 Then answered Peter, and said
unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to
be here: if thou wilt, let us make here
three tabernacles; one for thee, and
one for Moses, and one for Elias.</cell><cell>5 And Peter answered and said to
Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be
here: and let us make three tabernacles;
one for thee, and one for
Moses, and one for Elias.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>6 For he wist not what to say: for
they were sore afraid.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5 While he yet spake, behold, a
bright cloud overshadowed them: and
behold, a voice out of the cloud,
which said, This is my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased: hear ye
him.</cell><cell>7 And there was a cloud that overshadowed
them: and a voice came
out of the cloud, saying, This is my
beloved Son: hear him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And when the disciples heard <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>,
they fell on their face, and were sore
afraid.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And Jesus came and touched
them, and said, Arise, and be not
afraid.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And when they had lifted up
their eyes, they saw no man, save
Jesus only.</cell><cell>8 And suddenly, when they had
looked round about, they saw no man
any more, save Jesus only with themselves.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And as they came down from the
mountain, Jesus charged them, saying,
Tell the vision to no man, until
the Son of man be risen again from
the dead.</cell><cell>9 And as they came down from
the mountain, he charged them that
they should tell no man what things
they had seen, till the Son of man
were risen from the dead.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>10 And they kept that saying with
themselves, questioning one with another
what the rising from the dead
should mean.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And his disciples asked him,
saying, Why then say the scribes,
that Elias must first come?</cell><cell>11 And they asked him, saying,
Why say the scribes that Elias must first come?</cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And Jesus answered and said
unto them, Elias truly shall first come,
and restore all things:</cell><cell>12 And he answered and told them,
Elias verily cometh first, and restoreth
all things; and how it is written
of the Son of man, that he must suffer
many things, and be set at naught.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 But I say unto you, That Elias
is come already, and they knew him
not, but have done unto him whatsoever
they listed: likewise shall also
the Son of man suffer of them.</cell><cell>13 But I say unto you, That Elias
is indeed come, and they have done
unto him whatsoever they listed, as it
is written of him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13 Then the disciples understood
that he spake unto them of John the
Baptist.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX. 28-36.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 And it came to pass, about an
eight days after these sayings, he
took Peter, and John, and James, and
went up into a mountain to pray.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And as he prayed, the fashion
of his countenance was altered, and
his raiment <hi rend='italic'>was</hi> white <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> glistering.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And behold, there talked with
him two men, which were Moses and
Elias:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 Who appeared in glory, and
spake of his decease which he should
accomplish at Jerusalem.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 But Peter and they that were
with him were heavy with sleep:
and when they were awake, they saw
his glory, and the two men that stood
with him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 And it came to pass, as they
departed from him, Peter said unto
Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be
here: and let us make three tabernacles;
one for thee, and one for
Moses, and one for Elias: not knowing
what he said.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 While he thus spake, there
came a cloud, and overshadowed
them: and they feared as they entered
into the cloud.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 And there came a voice out of
the cloud, saying, This is my beloved
Son: hear him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 And when the voice was past,
Jesus was found alone. And they
kept <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> close, and told no man<note place='foot'>It is remarkable that Luke assigns no reason for this
extraordinary silence; leaving his narrative in this place imperfect and obscure, which an
impostor would not have done. It is explained by the command of Jesus, related by
Matthew and Mark.</note> in those
days any of those things which they
had seen.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>

<div>
<head>§ 76. The healing of a demoniac, whom the disciples
could not heal. <hi rend='italic'>Region of Cesarea Philippi</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVII. 14-21.</cell><cell>CH. IX. 14-29.</cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And when they were come to
the multitude, there came to him a
<hi rend='italic'>certain</hi> man kneeling down to him,
and saying,</cell><cell>14 And when he came to <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> disciples,
he saw a great multitude about
them, and the scribes questioning with them.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15 Lord, have mercy on my son;
for he is lunatic, and sore vexed, for
oft-times he falleth into the fire, and
oft into the water.</cell><cell>15 And straightway all the people,
when they beheld him, were greatly
mazed, and, running to <hi rend='italic'>him, saluted him.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And I brought him to thy disciples,
and they could not cure him.</cell><cell>16 And he asked the scribes,
What question ye with them?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17 And one of the multitude answered
and said, Master, I have
brought unto thee my son, which hath
a dumb spirit;</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18 And wheresoever he taketh him,
he teareth him; and he foameth and
gnasheth with his teeth, and pineth
away; and I spake to thy disciples
that they should cast him out, and
they could not.</cell></row>
<row><cell>17 Then Jesus answered and said,
O faithless and perverse generation,
how long shall I be with you? how
long shall I suffer you? Bring him
hither to me.</cell><cell>19 He answereth him, and saith, O
faithless generation, how long shall I
be with you? how long shall I suffer
you? Bring him unto me.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20 And they brought him unto
him: and when he saw him, straightway
the spirit tare him; and he fell
on the ground, and wallowed, foaming.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21 And he asked his father, How
long is it ago since this came unto
him? And he said, Of a child.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22 And oft-times it hath cast him
into the fire, and into the waters to
destroy him: but if thou canst do
any thing, have compassion on us,
and help us.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>23 Jesus said unto him, If thou
canst believe, all things are possible
to him that believeth.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>24 And straightway the father of
the child cried out, and said with
tears, Lord, I believe: help thou mine
unbelief.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>25 When Jesus saw that the people
came running together, he rebuked
the foul spirit, saying unto him, <hi rend='italic'>Thou</hi>
dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee,
come out of him, and enter no more
into him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>26 And <hi rend='italic'>the spirit</hi> cried, and rent
him sore, and came out of him: and
he was as one dead; insomuch that
many said, He is dead.</cell></row>
<row><cell>18 And Jesus rebuked the devil,
and he departed out of him: and the
child was cured from that very hour.</cell><cell>27 But Jesus took him by the
hand, and lifted him up; and he arose.</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 Then came the disciples to Jesus
apart, and said, Why could not
we cast him out?</cell><cell>28 And when he was come into
the house, his disciples asked him
privately, Why could we not cast him
out?</cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And Jesus said unto them, Because
of your unbelief: for verily I
say unto you, if ye have faith as a
grain of mustard-seed, ye shall say
unto this mountain, Remove hence to
yonder place; and it shall remove;
and nothing shall be impossible unto
you.</cell><cell>29 And he said unto them, This
kind can come forth by nothing, but
by prayer and fasting.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21 Howbeit, this kind goeth not
out, but by prayer and fasting.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX. 37-43.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 And it came to pass, that on the
next day, when they were come
down from the hill, much people met
him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 And behold, a man of the company
cried out, saying, Master, I beseech
thee look upon my son: for he
is mine only child.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 And lo, a spirit taketh him, and
he suddenly crieth out; and it teareth
him that he foameth again, and, bruising
him, hardly departeth from him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 And I besought thy disciples to
cast him out, and they could not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 And Jesus, answering, said, O
faithless and perverse generation, how
long shall I be with you, and suffer
you? Bring thy son hither.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 And as he was yet a coming,
the devil threw him down, and tare
<hi rend='italic'>him</hi>. And Jesus rebuked the unclean
spirit, and healed the child, and delivered
him again to his father.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 And they were all amazed at
the mighty power of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>

<div>
<anchor id='Section_77'/>
<head>§ 77, Jesus again foretells his own death and resurrection.
(See § 74.)  <hi rend='italic'>Galilee</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. xvii. 22, 23.</cell><cell>CH. ix. 30-32.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>30 And they departed thence, and
passed through Galilee; and he
would not that any man should know
it.</cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And while they abode in Galilee,
Jesus said unto them, The Son of
man shall be betrayed into the hands
of men:</cell><cell>31 For he taught his disciples,
and said unto them, The Son of man
is delivered into the hands of men,
and they shall kill him; and after
that he is killed, he shall rise the
third day.</cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And they shall kill him, and the
third day he shall be raised again.
And they were exceeding sorry.</cell><cell>32 But they understood not that
saying, and were afraid to ask him.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX. 43-45.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 But while they
wondered every one at all things which
Jesus did, he said unto his disciples,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 Let these sayings sink down into
your ears: for the Son of man shall be
delivered into the hands of men.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 But they understood not this
saying, and it was hid from them, that
they perceived it not: and they feared
to ask him of that saying.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 78. The tribute-money
miraculously provided. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVII. 24-27.</cell><cell>CH. IX. 33.</cell></row>
<row><cell>24 And when they were come to
Capernaum, they that received tribute-<hi rend='italic'>money</hi>,<note place='foot'>The original word is <hi rend='italic'>didrachma</hi>, denoting, not tribute or
tax in general, but a specific and particular offering which every Jew paid to God. See
Josephus, Ant. xviii. x. § 1. This minute accuracy of the evangelist is worthy of note, as
an indication of veracity.</note>
came to Peter, and said, Doth
not your Master pay tribute?</cell><cell>33 And he came to Capernaum:</cell></row>
<row><cell>25 He saith, Yes. And when he
was come into the house, Jesus prevented
him, saying, What thinkest
thou, Simon? of whom do the kings of
the earth take custom or tribute? of
their own children, or of strangers?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 Peter saith unto him, Of strangers.
Jesus saith unto him, Then are
the children free.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 Notwithstanding, lest we should
offend them, go thou to the sea, and
cast a hook, and take up the fish that
first cometh up: and when thou hast
opened his mouth, thou shalt find a
piece of money: that take, and give
unto them for me and thee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>

<div>
<head>§ 79. The disciples contend who should be the greatest. Jesus
exhorts to humility, forbearance and brotherly love. <hi rend='italic'>Capernaum</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVIII. 1-35.</cell><cell>CH. IX. 33-50.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>33 And being in the house, he asked
them, What was it that ye disputed
among yourselves by the way?</cell></row>
<row><cell>At the same time came the disciples
unto Jesus, saying, Who is the
greatest in the kingdom of heaven?</cell><cell>34 But they held their peace: for
by the way they had disputed among
themselves, who <hi rend='italic'>should be</hi> the greatest.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35 And he sat down, and called the
twelve, and saith unto them, if any
man desire to be first, <hi rend='italic'>the same</hi> shall
be last of all, and servant of all.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And Jesus called a little child
unto him, and set him in the midst of
them,</cell><cell>36 And he took a child, and set
him in the midst of them: and when
he had taken him in his arms, he said
unto them,</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And said, Verily, I say unto you,
Except ye be converted, and become
as little children, ye shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven.</cell><cell>37 Whosoever shall receive one of
such children in my name, receiveth
me: and whosoever shall receive me,
receiveth not me, but him that sent me.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4 Whosoever therefore shall humble
himself as this little child, the
same is greatest in the kingdom of
heaven.</cell><cell>38 And John answered him, saying,
Master, we saw one casting out devils
in thy name, and he followeth not us;
and we forbade him, because he followeth
not us.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And whoso shall receive one such
little child in my name, receiveth me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 But whoso shall offend one of
these little ones which believe in me,
it were better for him that a millstone
were hanged about his neck, and <hi rend='italic'>that</hi>
he were drowned in the depth of the
sea.</cell><cell>39 But Jesus said, Forbid him not:
for there is no man which shall do a
miracle in my name, that can lightly
speak evil of me.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>40 For he that is not against us, is
on our part.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7 Wo unto the world because of
offences! for it must needs be that
offences come; but wo to that man by
whom the offence cometh:</cell><cell>41 for whosoever shall give you a
cup of water to drink in my name,
because ye belong to Christ, verily I
say unto you, he shall not lose his
reward.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8 Wherefore, if thy hand or thy
foot offend thee, cut them off, and
cast <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> from thee; it is better for
thee to enter into life halt or maimed,
rather than having two hands or two
feet, to be cast into everlasting fire.</cell><cell>42 And whosoever shall offend one
of <hi rend='italic'>these</hi> little ones that believe in me,
it is better for him that a millstone
were hanged about his neck, and he
were cast into the sea.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And if thine eye offend thee,
pluck it out, and cast <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> from thee: it
is better for thee to enter into life with
one eye, rather than having two eyes,
to be cast into hell-fire.</cell><cell>43 And if thy hand offend thee, cut
it off: It is better for thee to enter
into life maimed, than having two
hands to go into hell, into the fire that
never shall be quenched:</cell></row>
<row><cell>10 Take heed that ye despise not
one of these little ones: for I say
unto you, That in heaven their angels
do always behold the face of my
Father which is in heaven.</cell><cell>44 Where their worm dieth not,
and the fire is not quenched.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11 For the Son of man is come to
save that which was lost.</cell><cell>45 And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off:
it is better for thee to enter halt into life, than having two feet to be cast
into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 How think ye? If a man have
a hundred sheep, and one of them be
gone astray, doth he not leave the
ninety and nine, and goeth into the
mountains, and seeketh that which is
gone astray?</cell><cell>46 Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not
quenched.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And if so be that he find it,
verily I say unto you, he rejoiceth
more of that <hi rend='italic'>sheep</hi>, than of the ninety
and nine which went not astray.</cell><cell>47 And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it
out: it is better for thee to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having
two eyes, to be cast into hell-fire:</cell></row>
<row><cell>14 Even so it is not the will of your
Father which is in heaven, that one of
these little ones should perish.</cell><cell>48 Where their worm dieth not, and the
fire is not quenched.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15 Moreover, if thy brother shall
trespass against thee, go and tell him
his fault between thee and him alone;
if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained
thy brother.</cell><cell>49 For every one shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice
shall be salted with salt.</cell></row>
<row><cell>16 But if he will not hear <hi rend='italic'>thee, then</hi>
take with thee one or two more, that
in the mouth of two or three witnesses
every word may be established.</cell><cell>50 Salt <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> good:
but if the salt have lost his saltness, wherewith will ye season it? Have salt
in yourselves, and have peace one with another.</cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And if he shall neglect to hear
them, tell <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> unto the church: but if
he neglect to hear the church, let him
be unto thee as a heathen man and a
publican.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 Verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever
ye shall bind on earth, shall be
bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye
shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 Again I say unto you, That if
two of you shall agree on earth, as
touching anything that they shall ask,
it shall be done for them of my Father
which is in heaven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 For where two or three are
gathered together in my name, there
am I in the midst of them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 Then came Peter to him, and
said, Lord, how oft shall my brother
sin against me, and I forgive him?
till seven times?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 Jesus saith unto him, I say not
unto thee, Until seven times: but,
Until seventy times seven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 Therefore is the kingdom of
heaven likened unto a certain king
which would take account of his servants.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 And when he had begun to
reckon, one was brought unto him
which owed him ten thousand talents.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 But forasmuch as he had not to
pay, his lord commanded him to be
sold, and his wife and children, and
all that he had, and payment to be
made.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 The servant therefore fell down,
and worshipped him, saying, Lord,
have patience with me, and I will pay
thee all.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 Then the lord of that servant
was moved with compassion, and
loosed him, and forgave him the debt</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 But the same servant went out,
and found one of his fellow-servants,
which owed him a hundred pence:
and he laid hands on him, and took
<hi rend='italic'>him</hi> by the throat, saying, Pay me that
thou owest.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And his fellow-servant fell down
at his feet, and besought him, saying,
Have patience with me, and I will pay
thee all.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And he would not: but went
and cast him into prison, till he should
pay the debt.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 So when his fellow-servants saw
what was done, they were very sorry,
and came and told unto their lord all
that was done.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 Then his lord, after that he had
called him, said unto him, O thou
wicked servant, I forgave thee all that
debt, because thou desiredst me:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 Shouldest not thou also have had
compassion on thy fellow-servant, even
as I had pity on thee?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 And his lord was wroth, and
delivered him to the tormentors, till
he should pay all that was due unto
him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 So likewise shall my heavenly
Father do also unto you, if ye from
your hearts forgive not every one his
brother their trespasses.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX. 46-50.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46 Then there arose a reasoning
among them, which of them should be
greatest.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>47 And Jesus perceiving the thought
of their heart, took a child, and set
him by him,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>48 And said unto them, Whosoever
shall receive this child in my name,
receiveth me; and whosoever shall
receive me, receiveth him that sent
me: for he that is least among you all,
the same shall be great.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>49 And John answered and said,
Master, we saw one casting out devils<note place='foot'>The twelve apostles and the seventy disciples
were commissioned and sent forth at different times. Hence the person here alluded to
may, for aught that appears, have been one of the seventy, not personally known to John
and to those who were with him. <hi rend='italic'>Letters on Evil Spirits</hi>, p. 39.</note>
in thy name; and we forbade him,
because he followeth not with us.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>50 And Jesus said unto him, Forbid
<hi rend='italic'>him</hi> not: for he that is not against
us, is for us.<note place='foot'>Here Jesus says, He that is not against us is for us;
but in Matth. xii. 30, he says, He that is not with me is against me. Grotius regards
both as proverbial sayings;&mdash;Proverbia in utramque partem usurpata, veritatem suam
habent pro materia cui aptantur;&mdash;and alludes to similar forms in Prov. xxvi. 4, 5.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>

<div>
<head>§ 80. The Seventy instructed, and sent out.
<hi rend='italic'>Capernaum</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. X. 1-16.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>After these things, the Lord appointed
other seventy also, and sent
them two and two before his face into
every city, and place, whither he himself
would come.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 Therefore said he unto them,
The harvest truly <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> great, but the
labourers <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> few: pray ye therefore
the Lord of the harvest, that he would
send forth labourers into his harvest.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 Go your ways: behold, I send
you forth as lambs among wolves.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 Carry neither purse, nor scrip,
nor shoes: and salute no man by the
way.<note place='foot'>2 Kings iv. 29.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And into whatsoever house ye
enter, first say, Peace <hi rend='italic'>be</hi> to this house.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And if the son of peace be there,
your peace shall rest upon it: if not,
it shall turn to you again.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And in the same house remain,
eating and drinking such things as
they give: for the labourer <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> worthy of
his hire. Go not from house to house.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And into whatsoever city ye enter,
and they receive you, eat such
things as are set before you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And heal the sick that are therein,
and say unto them, The kingdom of
God is come nigh unto you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 But into whatsoever city ye
enter, and they receive you not, go
your ways out into the streets of the
same, and say,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 Even the very dust of your city
which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off
against you: notwithstanding, be ye
sure of this, that the kingdom of God
is come nigh unto you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 But I say unto you, That it
shall be more tolerable in that day for
Sodom than for that city.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 Wo unto thee, Chorazin! wo
unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the mighty
works had been done in Tyre and
Sidon, which have been done in you,
they had a great while ago repented,
sitting in sackcloth and ashes.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 But it shall be more tolerable
for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment,
than for you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And thou, Capernaum, which
art exalted to heaven, shall be thrust
down to hell.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 He that heareth you, heareth
me; and he that despiseth you, despiseth
me; and he that despiseth me,
despiseth him that sent me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>

<div>
<head>§ 81. Jesus goes up to the feast of tabernacles. His final
departure from Galilee. Incidents in Samaria.</head>


<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX. 51-56.</cell><cell>CH. VII. 2-10.</cell></row>
<row><cell>51 And it came to pass, when the
time was come that he should be received
up, he steadfastly set his face
to go to Jerusalem,</cell><cell>2 Now the Jews' feast of tabernacles
was at hand.</cell></row>
<row><cell>52 And sent messengers before his
face: and they went and entered into
a village of the Samaritans, to make
ready for him.</cell><cell>3 His brethren therefore said unto
him, Depart hence, and go into Judea,
that thy disciples also may see the
works that thou doest.</cell></row>
<row><cell>53 And they did not receive him,<note place='foot'>This was near the passover; when Jesus, going to
celebrate it at Jerusalem, plainly indicated that men ought to worship <emph>there</emph>; contrary to
the practice of the Samaritans, who, in opposition to the Holy City, had set up a temple
at Gerazim. Hence the cause of their hostility to him as well as to all others travelling
in that direction <emph>at that season</emph>. This account perfectly harmonizes with the respectful
deportment of the Samaritans towards him at the time of his interview with the woman
at Jacob's well, John iv. 1-42; for he was then coming <emph>from</emph> Judea, and it was not the
season of resorting thither for any purposes of devotion. John iv. 35. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Blunt</hi>, Veracity,
&amp;c., sect. i. 16.</note>
because his face was as though he
would go to Jerusalem.</cell><cell>4 For <hi rend='italic'>there is</hi> no man <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> doeth
anything in secret, and he himself
seeketh to be known openly. If thou
do these things, show thyself to the world.</cell></row>
<row><cell>54 And when his disciples James
and John saw <hi rend='italic'>this</hi>, they said, Lord,
wilt thou that we command fire to
come down from heaven, and consume
them, even as Elias did?</cell><cell>5 (For neither did his brethren believe
in him.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>55 But he turned, and rebuked
them, and said, Ye know not what
manner of spirit ye are of.</cell><cell>6 Then Jesus said unto them, My
time is not yet come: but your time
is always ready.</cell></row>
<row><cell>56 For the Son of man is not come
to destroy men's lives, but to save
<hi rend='italic'>them</hi>. And they went to another
village.</cell><cell>7 The world cannot hate you; but
me it hateth, because I testify of it,
that the works thereof are evil.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>8 Go ye up unto this feast: I go
not up yet unto this feast; for my
time is not yet full come.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>9 When he had said these words
unto them, he abode <hi rend='italic'>still</hi> in Galilee.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>10 But when his brethren were
gone up, then went he also up unto
the feast, not openly, but as it were in
secret.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 82. Ten lepers cleansed.
<hi rend='italic'>Samaria</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVII. 11-19.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And it came to pass, as he went
to Jerusalem, that he passed through
the midst of Samaria and Galilee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And as he entered into a certain
village, there met him ten men that
were lepers, which stood afar off:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And they lifted up <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> voices,
and said, Jesus, Master, have mercy
on us.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And when he saw <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>, he said
unto them, Go shew yourselves unto
the priests. And it came to pass,
that, as they went, they were cleansed.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And one of them, when he saw
that he was healed, turned back, and
with a loud voice glorified God,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And fell down on <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> face at his
feet, giving him thanks: and he was
a Samaritan.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And Jesus answering, said,
Were there not ten cleansed? but
where <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> the nine?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 There are not found that returned
to give glory to God, save this stranger.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And he said unto him, Arise, go
thy way: thy faith hath made thee
whole.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part VI. The Festival Of Tabernacles And The Subsequent Transactions,
Until Our Lord's Arrival At Bethany,
Six Days Before The Fourth Passover.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Time.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Six months, less one week.</hi>
</p>

<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>

<div>
<head>§ 83. Jesus at the festival of Tabernacles.
His public teaching. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VII. 11-53. CH. VIII. 1.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 Then the Jews sought him at
the feast, and said, Where is he?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And there was much murmuring
among the people concerning him: for
some said, He is a good man: others
said, Nay; but he deceiveth the people.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 Howbeit, no man spake openly of
him, for fear of the Jews.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 Now, about the midst of the
feast, Jesus went up into the temple
and taught.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And the Jews marvelled, saying,
How knoweth this man letters, having
never learned?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 Jesus answered them, and said,
My doctrine is not mine, but his that
sent me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 If any man will do his will, he
shall know of the doctrine, whether
it be of God, or <hi rend='italic'>whether</hi> I speak of
myself.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 He that speaketh of himself,
seeketh his own glory: but he that
seeketh his glory that sent him, the
same is true, and no unrighteousness
is in him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 Did not Moses give you the law,
and <hi rend='italic'>yet</hi> none of you keepeth the law?
Why go ye about to kill me?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 The people answered and said,
Thou hast a devil: who goeth about
to kill thee?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 Jesus answered and said unto
them, I have done one work, and ye
all marvel.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 Moses therefore gave unto you
circumcision, (not because it is of
Moses, but of the fathers;) and ye on
the sabbath-day circumcise a man.<note place='foot'>Lev. xii. 3.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 If a man on the sabbath-day
receive circumcision, that the law of
Moses should not be broken; are ye
angry at me, because I have made a
man every whit whole on the sabbath-day?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 Judge not according to the appearance,
but judge righteous judgement.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 Then said some of them of Jerusalem,
Is not this he whom they
seek to kill?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 But lo, he speaketh boldly, and
they say nothing unto him. Do the
rulers know indeed that this is the
very Christ?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 Howbeit, we know this man,
whence he is: but when Christ cometh,
no man knoweth whence he is.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 Then cried Jesus in the temple,
as he taught, saying, Ye both know
me, and ye know whence I am: and
I am not come of myself, but he that
sent me is true, whom ye know not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 But I know him; for I am from
him, and he hath sent me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 Then they sought to take him:
but no man laid hands on him, because
his hour was not yet come.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 And many of the people believed
on him, and said, When Christ cometh,
will he do more miracles than
these which this <hi rend='italic'>man</hi> hath done?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 The Pharisees heard that the
people murmured such things concerning
him: and the Pharisees and the
chief priests sent officers to take him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 Then said Jesus unto them, Yet
a little while am I with you, and <hi rend='italic'>then</hi>
I go unto him that sent me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 Ye shall seek me, and shall not
find <hi rend='italic'>me</hi>: and where I am, <hi rend='italic'>thither</hi> ye
cannot come.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 Then said the Jews among themselves,
Whither will he go, that we
shall not find him? will he go unto
the dispersed among the Gentiles, and
teach the Gentiles?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 What <hi rend='italic'>manner</hi> of saying is this
that he said, Ye shall seek me, and
shall not find <hi rend='italic'>me</hi>, and where I am,
<hi rend='italic'>thither</hi> ye cannot come;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 In the last day, that great <hi rend='italic'>day</hi>
of the feast,<note place='foot'>On this day, which was one of great joy and
festivity, it was the custom of the Jews to fetch water from the pool Siloam, some of
which they drank with loud acclamations of joy and thanksgiving; and some they brought
to the altar, in commemoration of the miraculous relief of their forefathers, when
thirsting in the wilderness; and some they brought as a drink-offering to God, to pray
for rain against the following seed-time. See <hi rend='smallcaps'>Benson's</hi> Life of Christ, p. 412. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jennings</hi>,
Ant. p. 495. The existence of this custom, thus remotely alluded to, gives great truthfulness
to the narrative.</note> Jesus stood and cried,
saying, If any man thirst, let him
come unto me, and drink.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 He that believeth on me, as the
scripture hath said,<note place='foot'>Isa. lv. 1, and lviii. 11, and xliv. 3. Zech. xiii. 1, and xiv. 8.</note> out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living water.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 (But this spake he of the Spirit,
which they that believe on him should
receive, for the Holy Ghost was not
yet <hi rend='italic'>given</hi>, because that Jesus was not
yet glorified.)</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 Many of the people therefore,
when they heard this saying, said, Of
a truth this is the Prophet.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 Others said, This is the Christ.
But some said, Shall Christ come out
of Galilee?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 Hath not the scripture said,<note place='foot'> Ps. lxxxix. 4, and cxxxii. 11. Mic. v. 2.</note>
That Christ cometh of the seed of
David, and out of the town of Bethlehem,
where David was?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 So there was a division among
the people because of him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 And some of them would have
taken him; but no man laid hands on
him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 Then came the officers to the
chief priests and Pharisees; and they
said unto them, Why have ye not
brought him?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46 The officers answered, Never
man spake like this man.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>47 Then answered them the Pharisees,
Are ye also deceived?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>48 Have any of the rulers, or of
the Pharisees believed on him?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>49 But this people who knoweth
not the law are cursed.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>50 Nicodemus saith unto them, (he
that came to Jesus by night, being
one of them,)</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>51 Doth our law judge <hi rend='italic'>any</hi> man
before it hear him, and know what he
doeth?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>52 They answered and said unto
him, Art thou also of Galilee: Search,
and look: for out of Galilee ariseth
no prophet.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>53 And every man went unto his
own house.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VIII.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Jesus went unto the mount of
Olives:<note place='foot'>It is apparent, from various incidental allusions
in the Evangelists, that it was the habit of our Lord at this period to spend his days in
Jerusalem, in teaching the people and healing the sick, and his nights in the Mount of
Olives, in prayer. Yet it is nowhere directly asserted; and the manner in which it is
slightly mentioned or alluded to by the sacred writers, is worthy of particular notice, as a
proof of their veracity, never met with, in works of fiction. Compare Matth. xxiv. 3, and
xxvi. 30; Mark xiii. 3, and xiv. 26; Luke vi. 12, and xxi. 37, 38, and xxii. 39; John
viii. 1, 2, and xviii. 1.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>

<div>
<head>§ 84. The woman taken in
adultery. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VIII. 2-11.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And early in the morning he
came again into the temple, and all
the people came unto him; and he sat
down and taught them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And the scribes and Pharisees
brought unto him a woman taken in
adultery; and when they had set her
in the midst,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 They say unto him, Master, this
woman was taken in adultery, in the
very act.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 Now Moses in the law<note place='foot'>Lev. xx. 10. Deut. xxii. 21.</note>  commanded
us, that such should be stoned:<note place='foot'>The Romans, in settling the provincial government
of Judea, which they had conquered, deprived the Jewish tribunals of the power of
inflicting capital punishments. John xviii. 31. The law of Moses, however, condemned
adulterers to be stoned to death. <q>This woman had been caught in the very fact.
Jesus must therefore determine against the law, which inflicted death; or against the
Romans, who suffered them not to put any body to death, and who would still less
have permitted it for such a crime as adultery, which was not capital among them.&mdash;If he
condemned not the adulteress <emph>to death</emph> when he was alone with her, he hereby teaches us
to submit to the civil laws of the places where we live.</q> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Basnage</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Jud</hi>. lib.
v. c. § 2.</note>
but what sayest thou?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 This they said, tempting him,
that they might have to accuse him.
But Jesus stooped down, and with his
finger wrote on the ground, <hi rend='italic'>as though
he heard them not</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 So when they continued asking
him, he lifted up himself, and said unto
them, He that is without sin among
you, let him first cast a stone<note place='foot'>When one was condemned to death, those
witnesses, whose evidence decided the sentence, inflicted the first blows, in order to add
the last degree of certainty to their evidence. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Dupin</hi>, Trial of Jesus, p. 7. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Salvador</hi>,
Histoire des Institutions de Moise, &amp;c. Liv. iv. ch. ii. p. 76.</note> at her.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And again he stooped down, and
wrote on the ground.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And they which heard <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, being
convicted by their <hi rend='italic'>own</hi> conscience,
went out one by one, beginning at the
eldest, <hi rend='italic'>even</hi> unto the last: and Jesus
was left alone, and the woman standing
in the midst.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 When Jesus had lifted up himself,
and saw none but the woman,
he said unto her, Woman, where are
those thine accusers? hath no man
condemned thee?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 She said, No man, Lord. And
Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn
thee: go, and sin no more.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 85. Further public teaching of our Lord. He reproves the
unbelieving Jews, and escapes from their hands. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. VIII. 12-59.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 Then spake Jesus again unto
them, saying, I am the light of the
world: he that followeth me shall not
walk in darkness, but shall have the
light of life.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 The Pharisees therefore said
unto him, Thou bearest record of thyself;
thy record is not true.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 Jesus answered and said unto
them, Though I bear record of myself,
<hi rend='italic'>yet</hi> my record is true: for I know
whence I came, and whither I go:
but ye cannot tell<note place='foot'>John vii. 28, is consistent with John viii. 14. <q>Ye
both know my transactions among you, and whence, as a man, I derive my descent;
(ch. vi. 42,) and yet there is a sense in which ye know not whence I am, as I came not,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>&amp;c. Kai</hi> is used in the same manner, Matth. ix. 19. <hi rend='italic'>And yet wisdom</hi>, &amp;c. See also
John ix. 30. In this latter sense (ch. viii. 14,) the Jews knew not whence Jesus
came, knew not his divine mission, and that he would return to the Father at his ascension.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note> whence I come, and
whither I go.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 Ye judge after the flesh, I judge
no man.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And yet if I judge, my judgment
is true: for I am not alone, but I and
the Father that sent me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 It is also written in your law,
that the testimony of two men is true.<note place='foot'>Deut. xvii. 6, and xix. 15.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 I am one that bear witness of
myself; and the Father that sent me,
beareth witness of me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 Then said they unto him, Where
is thy Father? Jesus answered, Ye
neither know me, nor my Father: if
ye had known me, ye should have
known my Father also.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 These words spake Jesus in the
treasury, as he taught in the temple:
and no man laid hands on him, for his
hour was not yet come.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 Then said Jesus again unto
them, I go my way, and ye shall seek
me, and shall die in your sins: whither
I go, ye cannot come.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 Then said the Jews, Will he
kill himself? because he saith, Whither
I go, ye cannot come.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And he said unto them, Ye are
from beneath; I am from above: ye
are of this world; I am not of this
world.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 I said therefore unto you, that
ye shall die in your sins: for if ye
believe not that I am <hi rend='italic'>he</hi>, ye shall die
in your sins.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 Then said they unto him, Who
art thou? And Jesus saith unto them,
Even <hi rend='italic'>the same</hi> that I said unto you
from the beginning.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 I have many things to say, and
to judge of you: but he that sent me,
is true; and I speak to the world
those things which I have heard of
him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 They understood not that he
spake to them of the Father.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 Then said Jesus unto them,
When ye have lifted up the Son of
man, then shall ye know that I am
<hi rend='italic'>he</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> I do nothing of myself;
but as my Father hath taught me, I
speak these things.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And he that sent me is with
me: the Father hath not left me
alone; for I do always those things
that please him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 As he spake these words, many
believed on him.<note place='foot'>The Jews who are said to have believed on
Jesus (John viii. 30) are not the same with those whom our Lord accuses of seeking to
kill him, ver. 40, nor with those who insulted him, ver. 48, &amp;c., although these are not
distinguished from the others in the narrative of John, who always mentions the Jews
indiscriminately as speaking with Jesus. Cler. Harm. 528. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 Then said Jesus to those Jews
which believed on him, If ye continue
in my word, <hi rend='italic'>then</hi> are ye my disciples
indeed;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 And ye shall know the truth,
and the truth shall make you free.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 They answered him, We be
Abraham's seed, and were never in
bondage to any man: how sayest thou,
Ye shall be made free?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 Jesus answered them, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Whosoever
committeth sin, is the servant of sin.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 And the servant abideth not in
the house for ever, <hi rend='italic'>but</hi> the Son abideth
ever.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 If the Son therefore shall make
you free, ye shall be free indeed.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 I know that ye are Abraham's
seed; but ye seek to kill me, because
my word hath no place in you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 I speak that which I have seen
with my Father: and ye do that
which ye have seen with your father.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 They answered and said unto
him, Abraham is our father. Jesus
saith unto them, If ye were Abraham's
children, ye would do the
works of Abraham.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 But now ye seek to kill me, a
man that hath told you the truth,
which I have heard of God: this did
not Abraham.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 Ye do the deeds of your father.
Then said they to him, We be not
born of fornication; we have one
Father, <hi rend='italic'>even</hi> God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 Jesus said unto them, If God
were your Father, ye would love me:
for I proceeded forth and came from
God; neither came I of myself, but
he sent me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 Why do ye not understand my
speech? even because ye cannot hear
my word.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 Ye are of <hi rend='italic'>your</hi> father the devil,
and the lusts of your father ye will
do: he was a murderer from the beginning,
and abode not in the truth;
because there is no truth in him.
When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh
of his own: for he is a liar, and the
father of it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 And because I tell you the truth,
ye believe me not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46 Which of you convinceth me of
sin? And if I say the truth, why do
ye not believe me?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>47 He that is of God, heareth God's
words: ye therefore hear <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> not,
because ye are not of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>48 Then answered the Jews, and
said unto him, Say we not well that
thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>49 Jesus answered, I have not a
devil: but I honour my Father, and
ye do dishonour me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>50 And I seek not mine own
glory: there is one that seeketh and
judgeth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>51 Verily, verily, I say unto you,
If a man keep my saying, he shall
never see death.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>52 Then said the Jews unto him,
Now we know that thou hast a devil.
Abraham is dead, and the prophets;
and thou sayest, If a man keep my
saying, he shall never taste of death.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>53 Art thou greater than our father
Abraham, which is dead! and the
prophets are dead: whom makest
thou thyself?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>54 Jesus answered, If I honour
myself, my honour is nothing: it is
my Father that honoureth me, of
whom ye say, that he is your God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>55 Yet ye have not known him;
but I know him: and if I should say,
I know him not, I shall be a liar like
unto you: but I know him, and keep
his saying.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>56 Your father Abraham rejoiced
to see my day: and he saw <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, and
was glad.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>57 Then said the Jews unto him,
Thou art not yet fifty years old, and
hast thou seen Abraham?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>58 Jesus said unto them, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham
was, I am.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>59 Then took they up stones to
cast at him: but Jesus hid himself,
and went out of the temple, going
through the midst of them, and so
passed by.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>

<div>
<head>§ 86. A lawyer instructed. Love to our neighbour defined.
Parable of the Good Samaritan. <hi rend='italic'>Near Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. X. 25-37.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And behold, a certain lawyer
stood up, and tempted him, saying,
Master, what shall I do to inherit
eternal life?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 He said unto him, What is
written in the law? how readest
thou?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And he answering said, Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy strength, and with
all thy mind; and thy neighbour as
thyself.<note place='foot'>Deut, vi. 5. Lev. xix. 18, and xviii. 5.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 And he said unto him, Thou
hast answered right: this do, and
thou shalt live.<note place='foot'>The professional reader will not fail to
observe the wisdom of this reply. The lawyer sought to learn from Jesus the terms of the
condition on which eternal life could be attained; and was made to answer for himself
that, by the law, it was attainable by nothing short of the highest degree of love,
to God and to his neighbour. The lawyer thus was reminded, out of his  own code, that,
this being a condition precedent, he could have no title to that which was promised, unless
he fully performed every part of the condition; and that in this sense, whosoever offended
in one point, or was deficient in performing any part of the condition, was guilty of all&mdash;lost
the benefit of all. If he murmured at the hardship of losing the reward of all the
good deeds he had done, merely for the omission to do a little more; the well-known rule
of law and of reason would teach him that nothing is to be allowed for acts of past performance
of a condition precedent, unless they are beneficial to the party for whom they
are performed.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 But he, willing to justify himself,
said unto Jesus, And who is my
neighbour?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And Jesus answering, said, A
certain <hi rend='italic'>man</hi> went down<note place='foot'>A note
of minute accuracy in the historian, Jericho being situated in the plain or valley
of Jordan, and Jerusalem being among the mountains of
Judea.</note> from Jerusalem
to Jericho, and fell among thieves,
which stripped him of his raiment,
and wounded <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, and departed, leaving
him <hi rend='italic'>half</hi> dead.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 And by chance there came
down a certain priest that way; and
when he saw him, he passed by on
the other side.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 And likewise a Levite, when he
was at the place, came and looked <hi rend='italic'>on
him</hi>, and passed by on the other side.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 But a certain Samaritan, as he
journeyed, came where he was: and
when he saw him, he had compassion
<hi rend='italic'>on him</hi>,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 And went to <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, and bound up
his wounds, pouring in oil and wine,
and set him on his own beast, and
brought him to an inn, and took care
of him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 And on the morrow, when he
departed, he took out two pence, and
gave <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> to the host, and said unto
him, Take care of him: and whatsoever
thou spendest more, when I come
again, I will repay thee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 Which now of these three, thinkest
thou, was neighbour unto him that
fell among the thieves?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 And he said, He that shewed
mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto
him, Go, and do thou likewise.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>

<div>
<head>§ 87. Jesus in the house of Martha
and Mary. <hi rend='italic'>Bethany</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. X. 38-42.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 Now it came to pass, as they
went, that he entered into a certain
village: and a certain woman, named
Martha, received him into her house.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 And she had a sister called
Mary, which also sat at Jesus' feet,
and heard his word.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 But Martha was cumbered about
much serving, and came to him, and
said, Lord, dost thou not care that my
sister hath left me to serve alone? bid
her therefore that she help me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 And Jesus answered, and said
unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art
careful, and troubled about many
things:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 But one thing is needful; and
Mary hath chosen that good part,
which shall not be taken away from
her.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>

<div>
<head>§ 88. The disciples again taught
how to pray. <hi rend='italic'>Near Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XI. 1-13.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>And it came to pass, that as he was
praying in a certain place, when he
ceased, one of his disciples said unto
him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John
also taught his disciples.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And he said unto them, When
ye pray, say, Our Father which art
in heaven, Hallowed be thy name.
Thy kingdom come. Thy will be
done, as in heaven, so in earth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 Give us day by day our daily
bread.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And forgive us our sins; for
we also forgive every one that is
indebted to us. And lead us not into
temptation; but deliver us from evil.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And he said unto them, Which of
you shall have a friend, and shall go
unto him at midnight,<note place='foot'>An incidental and very natural allusion to the well-known
custom of that country. For in those hot regions, men travel in the cool of the
evening and night, and rest in the daytime; looking for refreshment, if they are not
among total strangers, to the hospitality of friends.</note> and say unto
him, Friend, lend me three loaves:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 For a friend of mine in his journey
is come to me, and I have nothing
to set before him?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And he from within shall answer
and say, Trouble me not: the door
is now shut, and my children are
with me in bed; I cannot rise and
give thee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 I say unto you, Though he will
not rise and give him, because he is
his friend, yet because of his importunity
he will rise and give him as many
as he needeth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And I say unto you, Ask, and it
shall be given you; seek, and ye
shall find; knock, and it shall be
opened unto you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 For every one that asketh receiveth;
and he that seeketh findeth;
and to him that knocketh, it shall be
opened.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 If a son shall ask bread of any
of you that is a father, will he give
him a stone? or if <hi rend='italic'>he ask</hi> a fish, will
he for a fish give him a serpent?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 Or if he shall ask an egg, will
he offer him a scorpion?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 If ye then, being evil, know
how to give good gifts unto your
children, how much more shall <hi rend='italic'>your</hi>
heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit
to them that ask him?</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>

<div>
<head>§ 89. The Seventy return.
<hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem?</hi></head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. X. 17-24.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And the seventy returned again
with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils
are subject unto us through thy name.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 And he said unto them, I beheld
Satan as lightning fall from
heaven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 Behold, I give unto you power
to tread on serpents and scorpions,
and over all the power of the enemy:
and nothing shall by any means hurt
you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20. Notwithstanding, in this rejoice
not, that the spirits are subject unto
you; but rather rejoice, because your
names are written in heaven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 In that hour Jesus rejoiced in
spirit, and said, I thank thee, O
Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that
thou hast hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and hast revealed
them unto babes: even so, Father;
for so it seemed good in thy sight.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 All things are delivered to me
of my Father: and no man knoweth
who the Son is, but the Father; and
who the Father is, but the Son, and
he to whom the Son will reveal <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And he turned him unto <hi rend='italic'>his</hi>
disciples, and said privately, Blessed
are the eyes which see the things that
ye see.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 For I tell you, That many
prophets and kings have desired to
see those things which ye see, and
have not seen <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>; and to hear
those things which ye hear, and have
not heard <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>

<div>
<head>§ 90. A man born blind is healed on the Sabbath.
Our Lord's subsequent discourses. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. IX. 1-41. CH. X. 1-21.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>And as <hi rend='italic'>Jesus</hi> passed by, he saw a
man which was blind from <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> birth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And his disciples asked him,
saying, Master, who did sin, this
man, or his parents, that he was born
blind?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 Jesus answered, Neither hath
this man sinned, nor his parents: but
that the works of God should be made
manifest in him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 I must work the works of him
that sent me, while it is day: the night
cometh, when no man can work.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 As long as I am in the world, I
am the light of the world.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 When he had thus spoken, he
spat on the ground, and made clay of
the spittle, and he anointed the eyes
of the blind man with the clay,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And said unto him, Go, wash in
the pool of Siloam, (which is by
interpretation, Sent.) He went his
way therefore, and washed, and came
seeing.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 The neighbours therefore, and
they which before had seen him that
he was blind, said, Is not this he that
sat and begged?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 Some said, This is he: others
said, He is like him: <hi rend='italic'>but</hi> he said, I
am <hi rend='italic'>he</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 Therefore said they unto him,
How were thine eyes opened?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 He answered and said, A man
that is called Jesus, made clay, and
anointed mine eyes, and said unto me,
Go to the pool of Siloam, and wash;
and I went and washed, and I received
sight.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 Then said they unto him, Where
is he? He said, I know not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 They brought to the Pharisees
him that aforetime was blind.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And it was the sabbath-day when
Jesus made the clay, and opened his
eyes.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 Then again the Pharisees also
asked him how he had received his
sight. He said unto them, He put
clay upon mine eyes, and I washed,
and do see.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 Therefore said some of the
Pharisees, This man is not of God,
because he keepeth not the sabbath-day. Others said, How can a man
that is a sinner do such miracles?
And there was a division among
them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 They say unto the blind man
again, What sayest thou of him, that
he hath opened thine eyes? He said,
He is a prophet.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 But the Jews did not believe
concerning him, that he had been
blind, and received his sight, until
they called the parents of him that
had received his sight.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And they asked them, saying,
Is this your son, who ye say was
born blind? How then doth he now
see?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 His parents answered them and
said, We know that this is our son,
and that he was born blind:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 But by what means he now
seeth, we know not; or who hath
opened his eyes, we know not: he is
of age; ask him: he shall speak for
himself.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 These <hi rend='italic'>words</hi> spake his parents,
because they feared the Jews: for
the Jews had agreed already, that if
any man did confess that he was
Christ, he should be put out of the
synagogue.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 Therefore said his parents, He
is of age; ask him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 Then again called they the man
that was blind, and said unto him,
Give God the praise: we know that
this man is a sinner.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 He answered and said, Whether
he be a sinner <hi rend='italic'>or no</hi>, I know not:
one thing I know, that, whereas I
was blind, now I see.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 Then said they to him again,
What did he to thee? how opened he
thine eyes?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 He answered them, I have told
you already, and ye did not hear:
wherefore would ye hear <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> again?
will ye also be his disciples?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 Then they reviled him, and said,
Thou art his disciple, but we are
Moses' disciples.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 We know that God spake unto
Moses; <hi rend='italic'>as for</hi> this <hi rend='italic'>fellow</hi>, we know
not from whence he is.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 The man answered and said unto
them, Why, herein is a marvellous
thing, that ye know not from whence
he is, and <hi rend='italic'>yet</hi> he hath opened mine
eyes.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 Now we know that God heareth
not sinners; but if any man be a worshipper
of God, and doeth his will,
him he heareth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 Since the world began was it
not heard that any man opened the
eyes of one that was born blind.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 If this man were not of God, he
could do nothing.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 They answered and said unto
him, Thou wast altogether born in
sins, and dost thou teach us? And
they cast him out.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 Jesus heard that they had cast
him out: and when he had found
him, he said unto him, Dost thou believe
on the Son of God?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 He answered and said, Who
is he, Lord, that I might believe on
him?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 And Jesus said unto him, Thou
hast both seen him, and it is he that
talketh with thee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 And he said, Lord, I believe.
And he worshipped him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 And Jesus said, For judgment
I am come into this world; that they
which see not might see; and that
they which see might be made blind.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 And <hi rend='italic'>some</hi> of the Pharisees which
were with him heard these words, and
said unto him, Are we blind also?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 Jesus said unto them, If ye were
blind, ye should have no sin: but now
ye say, We see; therefore your sin
remaineth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. X.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Verily, verily, I say unto you,
He that entereth not by the door into
the sheepfold, but climbeth up some
other way, the same is a thief and a
robber.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 But he that entereth in by the
door is the shepherd of the sheep.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 To him the porter openeth; and
the sheep hear his voice: and he
calleth his own sheep by name, and
leadeth them out.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And when he putteth forth his
own sheep, he goeth before them, and
the sheep follow him: for they know
his voice.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And a stranger will they not follow,
but will flee from him: for they
know not the voice of strangers.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 This parable spake Jesus unto
them: but they understood not what
things they were which he spake unto
them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 Then said Jesus unto them again,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am
the door of the sheep.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 All that ever came before me are
thieves and robbers: but the sheep
did not hear them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 I am the door: by me if any man
enter in, he shall be saved, and shall
go in and out, and find pasture.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 The thief cometh not, but for
to steal, and to kill, and to destroy:
I am come that they might have life,
and that they might have it more
abundantly.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 I am the good shepherd: the
good shepherd giveth his life for the
sheep.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 But he that is a hireling, and
not the shepherd, whose own the sheep
are not, seeth the wolf coming, and
leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; and the
wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the
sheep.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 The hireling fleeth, because he
is a hireling, and careth not for the
sheep.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 I am the good shepherd, and
know my <hi rend='italic'>sheep</hi>, and am known of
mine.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 As the Father knoweth me,
even so know I the Father: and I lay
down my life for the sheep.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And other sheep I have, which
are not of this fold: them also I must
bring, and they shall hear my voice;
and there shall be one fold, <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> one
shepherd.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 Therefore doth my Father love
me, because I lay down my life, that
I might take it again.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 No man taketh it from me, but
I lay it down of myself. I have power
to lay it down, and I have power to
take it again. This commandment
have I received of my Father.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 There was a division therefore
again among the Jews for these sayings.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And many of them said, He
hath a devil, and is mad; why hear
ye him?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 Others said, These are not the
words of him that hath a devil. Can
a devil open the eyes of the blind?</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>

<div>
<head>§ 91. Jesus at Jerusalem at the feast of dedication.
He retires beyond Jordan. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem. Bethany beyond Jordan</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. X. 22-42.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And it was at Jerusalem the
feast of the dedication, and it was
winter.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And Jesus walked in the temple
in Solomon's porch.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 Then came the Jews round about
him, and said unto him, How long
dost thou make us to doubt? If thou
be the Christ, tell us plainly.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 Jesus answered them, I told you,
and ye believed not: the works that I
do in my Father's name, they bear
witness of me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 But ye believe not, because ye
are not of my sheep, as I said unto
you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 My sheep hear my voice, and I
know them, and they follow me:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 And I give unto them eternal
life; and they shall never perish, neither
shall any pluck them out of my
hand.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 My Father, which gave <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>
me, is greater than all; and none is
able to pluck <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> out of my Father's
hand.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 I and <hi rend='italic'>my</hi> Father are one.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 Then the Jews took up stones
again to stone him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 Jesus answered them, Many
good works have I shewed you from
my Father; for which of those works
do ye stone me?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 The Jews answered him, saying,
For a good work we stone thee not;
but for blasphemy, and because that
thou, being a man, makest thyself
God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 Jesus answered them, Is it not
written in your law, I said, Ye are
gods?<note place='foot'>Ps. lxxxii. 6.  Ex. xxii. 7, seq.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 If he called them gods, unto
whom the word of God came, and the
scripture cannot be broken;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 Say ye of him whom the Father
hath sanctified, and sent into the
world, Thou blasphemest; because I
said, I am the Son of God?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 If I do not the works of my
Father, believe me not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 But if I do, though ye believe
not me, believe the works: that ye
may know and believe that the Father
<hi rend='italic'>is</hi> in me, and I in him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 Therefore they sought again to
take him; but he escaped out of their
hand,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 And went away again beyond
Jordan, into the place where John at
first baptized; and there he abode.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 And many resorted unto him,
and said, John did no miracle; but
all things that John spake of this man
were true.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 And many believed on him
there.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>

<div>
<head>§ 92. The raising of Lazarus.
<hi rend='italic'>Bethany</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XI. 1-46.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Now a certain man was sick, named
Lazarus, of Bethany, the town of
Mary and her sister Martha.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 (It was <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> Mary which anointed
the Lord with ointment, and wiped
his feet with her hair, whose brother
Lazarus was sick.)</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 Therefore his sisters sent unto
him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom
thou lovest is sick.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 When Jesus heard <hi rend='italic'>that</hi>, he said,
This sickness is not unto death, but
for the glory of God, that the Son of
God might be glorified thereby.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 Now Jesus loved Martha, and her
sister, and Lazarus.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 When he had heard therefore that
he was sick, he abode two days still
in the same place where he was.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 Then after that saith he to <hi rend='italic'>his</hi>
disciples, Let us go into Judea again.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 <hi rend='italic'>His</hi> disciples say unto him, Master,
the Jews of late sought to stone
thee; and goest thou thither again?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 Jesus answered, Are there not
twelve hours in the day? If any man
walk in the day, he stumbleth not,
because he seeth the light of this
world.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 But if a man walk in the night,
he stumbleth, because there is no
light in him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 These things said he: and after
that he saith unto them, Our friend
Lazarus sleepeth; but I go that I
may awake him out of sleep.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 Then said his disciples, Lord, if
he sleep, he shall do well.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 Howbeit Jesus spake of his
death: but they thought that he had
spoken of taking of rest in sleep.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 Then said Jesus unto them
plainly, Lazarus is dead.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And I am glad for your sakes
that I was not there, to the intent ye
may believe; nevertheless, let us go
unto him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 Then said Thomas, which is
called Didymus, unto his fellow-disciples,
Let us also go, that we may
die with him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 Then when Jesus came, he
found that he had <hi rend='italic'>lain</hi> in the grave
four days already.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 (Now Bethany was nigh unto
Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off:)</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And many of the Jews came to
Martha and Mary, to comfort them
concerning their brother.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 Then Martha, as soon as she
heard that Jesus was coming, went
and met him: but Mary sat <hi rend='italic'>still</hi> in
the house.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 Then said Martha unto Jesus,
Lord, if thou hadst been here, my
brother had not died.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 But I know that even now,
whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God
will give <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> thee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 Jesus saith unto her, Thy brother
shall rise again.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 Martha saith unto him, I know
that he shall rise again in the resurrection
at the last day.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 Jesus said unto her, I am the
resurrection, and the life: he that believeth
in me, though he were dead,
yet shall he live:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And whosoever liveth, and believeth
in me, shall never die. Believest
thou this?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 She saith unto him, Yea, Lord:
I believe that thou art the Christ, the
Son of God, which should come into
the world.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 And when she had so said, she
went her way, and called Mary her
sister secretly, saying, The master is
come, and calleth for thee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 As soon as she heard <hi rend='italic'>that</hi>, she
arose quickly, and came unto him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 Now Jesus was not yet come
into the town, but was in that place
where Martha met him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 The Jews then which were with
her in the house, and comforted her,
when they saw Mary that she rose up
hastily, and went out, followed her,
saying, She goeth unto the grave to
weep there.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 Then when Mary was come
where Jesus was, and saw him, she
fell down at his feet, saying unto him,
Lord, if thou hadst been here, my
brother had not died.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 When Jesus therefore saw her
weeping, and the Jews also weeping
which came with her, he groaned in
the spirit, and was troubled,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 And said, Where have ye laid
him? They say unto him, Lord, come
and see.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 Jesus wept.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 Then said the Jews, Behold how
he loved him!</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 And some of them said, Could
not this man, which opened the eyes
of the blind, have caused that even
this man should not have died?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 Jesus therefore again groaning
in himself, cometh to the grave. It
was a cave, and a stone lay upon it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 Jesus said, Take ye away the
stone. Martha, the sister of him that
was dead, saith unto him, Lord, by
this time he stinketh: for he hath
been <hi rend='italic'>dead</hi> four days.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 Jesus saith unto her, Said I not
unto thee, that if thou wouldest believe,
thou shouldest see the glory of
God?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 Then they took away the stone
<hi rend='italic'>from the place</hi> where the dead was
laid. And Jesus lifted up <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> eyes,
and said, Father, I thank thee that
thou hast heard me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 And I knew that thou hearest
me always: but because of the people
which stand by, I said <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, that
they may believe that thou hast sent
me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 And when he thus had spoken,
he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus,
come forth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 And he that was dead came
forth, bound hand and foot with graveclothes:
and his face was bound about
with a napkin. Jesus saith unto them,
Loose him, and let him go.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 Then many of the Jews which
came to Mary, and had seen the
things which Jesus did, believed on
him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46 But some of them went their
ways to the Pharisees, and told them
what things Jesus had done.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>

<div>
<head>§ 93. The counsel of Caiaphas against Jesus. He
retires from Jerusalem. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem. Ephraim</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XI. 47-54.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>47 Then gathered the chief priests
and the Pharisees a council, and said,
What do we? for this man doeth
many miracles.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>48 If we let him thus alone, all
<hi rend='italic'>men</hi> will believe on him: and the
Romans shall come, and take away
both our place and nation.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>49 And one of them, <hi rend='italic'>named</hi> Caiaphas,
being the high priest that same
year, said unto them, Ye know nothing
at all,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>50 Nor consider that it is expedient
for us, that one man should die for the
people, and that the whole nation
perish not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>51 And this spake he not of himself:
but being high priest that year,
he prophesied that Jesus should die
for that nation;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>52 And not for that nation only,
but that also he should gather together
in one the children of God that were
scattered abroad.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>53 Then from that day forth they
took counsel together for to put him
to death.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>54 Jesus therefore walked no more
openly among the Jews; but went
thence unto a country near to the wilderness,
into a city called Ephraim,
and there continued with his disciples.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>

<div>
<head>§ 94. Jesus, beyond Jordan, is followed by multitudes. The healing
of the infirm woman on the Sabbath. <hi rend='italic'>Valley of Jordan. Perea</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIX. 1, 2.</cell><cell>CH. X. 1.</cell></row>
<row><cell>And it came to pass, <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> when
Jesus had finished these sayings, he
departed from Galilee, and came into
the coasts of Judea, beyond Jordan:</cell><cell>And he arose from thence, and
cometh into the coasts of Judea, by
the farther side of Jordan: and the
people resort unto him again; and, as
he was wont, he taught them again.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And great multitudes followed
him, and he healed them there.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIII. 10-21.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And he was teaching in one of
the synagogues on the sabbath.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And behold, there was a woman
which had a spirit of infirmity eighteen
years, and was bowed together,
and could in no wise lift up <hi rend='italic'>herself</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And when Jesus saw her, he
called <hi rend='italic'>her to him</hi>, and said unto her,
Woman, thou art loosed from thine
infirmity.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And he laid <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> hands on her:
and immediately she was made straight,
and glorified God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And the ruler of the synagogue
answered with indignation, because
that Jesus had healed on the sabbath-day,
and said unto the people, There
are six days in which men ought to
work: in them therefore come and
be healed, and not on the sabbath-day.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 The Lord then answered him,
and said, <hi rend='italic'>Thou</hi> hypocrite, doth not
each one of you on the sabbath loose
his ox or <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> ass from the stall, and
lead <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> away to watering?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And ought not this woman, being
a daughter of Abraham, whom
Satan hath bound, lo, these eighteen
years, be loosed from this bond on the
sabbath-day?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And when he had said these
things, all his adversaries were
ashamed: and all the people rejoiced
for all the glorious things that were
done by him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 Then said he, Unto what is the
kingdom of God like? and whereunto
shall I resemble it?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 It is like a grain of mustard-seed which a man took, and cast into
his garden, and it grew, and waxed a
great tree; and the fowls of the air
lodged in the branches of it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And again he said, Whereunto
shall I liken the kingdom of God?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 It is like leaven, which a woman
took and hid in three measures of
meal, till the whole was leavened.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>

<div>
<head>§ 95. Our Lord goes teaching and journeying towards Jerusalem.
He is warned against Herod. <hi rend='italic'>Perea</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIII. 22-35.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And he went through the cities
and villages, teaching, and journeying
toward Jerusalem.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 Then said one unto him, Lord,
are there few that be saved? And he
said unto them,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 Strive to enter in at the strait
gate: for many, I say unto you,
will seek to enter in, and shall not be
able.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 When once the Master of the
house is risen up, and hath shut to
the door, and ye begin to stand without,
and to knock at the door, saying,
Lord, Lord, open unto us; and he
shall answer and say unto you, I
know you not whence ye are:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 Then shall ye begin to say,
We have eaten and drunk in thy
presence, and thou hast taught in our
streets.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 But he shall say, I tell you, I
know you not whence ye are; depart
from me, all <hi rend='italic'>ye</hi> workers of iniquity.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 There shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and
all the prophets, in the kingdom of
God, and you <hi rend='italic'>yourselves</hi> thrust out.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And they shall come from the
east, and <hi rend='italic'>from</hi> the west, and from the
north, and <hi rend='italic'>from</hi> the south, and shall
sit down in the kingdom of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And behold, there are last,
which shall be first; and there are
first, which shall be last.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 The same day there came certain
of the Pharisees, saying unto him,
Get thee out, and depart hence; for
Herod will kill thee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 And he said unto them, Go ye
and tell that fox, Behold, I cast out
devils, and I do cures to-day and to-morrow,
and the third <hi rend='italic'>day</hi> I shall be
perfected.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 Nevertheless, I must work to-day
and to-morrow, and the <hi rend='italic'>day</hi> following:
for it cannot be that a prophet
perish out of Jerusalem.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which
killest the prophets, and stonest them
that are sent unto thee; how often
would I have gathered thy children
together, as a hen <hi rend='italic'>doth gather</hi> her
brood under <hi rend='italic'>her</hi> wings, and ye would
not!</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 Behold, your house is left unto
you desolate.<note place='foot'> Ps. lxix. 25. Jer. xii. 7, and xxii. 5.</note> And verily, I say unto
you, Ye shall not see me, until <hi rend='italic'>the time</hi>
come when ye shall say, Blessed <hi rend='italic'>is</hi>
he that cometh in the name of the
Lord.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>

<div>
<head>§ 96. Our Lord dines with a chief Pharisee
on the Sabbath. Incidents. <hi rend='italic'>Perea</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIV. 1-24.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>And it came to pass, as he went
into the house of one of the chief
Pharisees to eat bread on the sabbath-day,
that they watched him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And behold, there was a certain
man before him which had the dropsy.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And Jesus answering, spake unto
the lawyers and Pharisees, saying, Is
it lawful to heal on the sabbath-day?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And they held their peace. And
he took <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, and healed him, and let
him go:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And answered them, saying,
Which of you shall have an ass or
an ox fallen into a pit, and will not
straightway pull him out on the sabbath-day?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And they could not answer him
again to these things.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And he put forth a parable to
those which were bidden, when he
marked how they chose out the chief
rooms; saying unto them,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 When thou art bidden of any <hi rend='italic'>man</hi>
to a wedding, sit not down in the
highest room, lest a more honourable
man than thou be bidden of him;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And he that bade thee and him
come and say to thee, Give this man
place; and thou begin with shame to
take the lowest room.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 But when thou art bidden, go
and sit down in the lowest room;
that when he that bade thee cometh,
he may say unto thee, Friend, go up
higher: then shalt thou have worship
in the presence of them that sit at
<hi rend='italic'>meat</hi> with thee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 For whosoever exalteth himself
shall be abased, and he that humbleth
himself shall be exalted.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 Then said he also to him that
bade him, When thou makest a dinner
or a supper, call not thy friends, nor
thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor
<hi rend='italic'>thy</hi> rich neighbours; lest they also
bid thee again, and a recompense be
made thee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 But when thou makest a feast,
call the poor, the maimed, the lame,
the blind;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And thou shalt be blessed: for
they cannot recompense thee: for thou
shalt be recompensed at the resurrection
of the just.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And when one of them that sat
at meat with him heard these things,
he said unto him, Blessed <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> he that
shall eat bread in the kingdom of
God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 Then said he unto him, A certain
man made a great supper, and
bade many:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And sent his servant at supper-time,
to say to them that were bidden,
Come, for all things are now
ready.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 And they all with one <hi rend='italic'>consent</hi>
began to make excuse. The first
said unto him, I have bought a piece
of ground, and I must needs go and
see it: I pray thee have me excused.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And another said, I have bought
five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove
them: I pray thee have me excused.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And another said, I have married
a wife: and therefore I cannot
come.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 So that servant came, and
shewed his lord these things. Then
the master of the house being angry,
said to his servant, Go out quickly
into the streets and lanes of the
city, and bring in hither the poor, and
the maimed, and the halt, and the
blind.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And the servant said, Lord, it is
done as thou hast commanded, and yet
there is room.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And the lord said unto the servant,
Go out into the highways and
hedges, and compel <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> to come in,
that my house may be filled.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 For I say unto you, that none of
those men which were bidden, shall
taste of my supper.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>

<div>
<head>§ 97. What is required of true
disciples. <hi rend='italic'>Perea</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIV. 25-35.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And there were great multitudes
with him: and he turned, and said
unto them,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 If any <hi rend='italic'>man</hi> come to me, and hate
not his father, and mother, and wife,
and children, and brethren, and sisters,
yea, and his own life also, he cannot
be my disciple.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And whosoever doth not bear
his cross, and come after me, cannot
be my disciple.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 For which of you, intending to
build a tower, sitteth not down first,
and counteth the cost, whether he
have <hi rend='italic'>sufficient</hi> to finish <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 Lest haply after he hath laid
the foundation, and is not able to
finish <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, all that behold <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> begin to
mock him,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 Saying, This man began to
build, and was not able to finish.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 Or what king going, to make
war against another king, sitteth not
down first, and consulteth whether he
be able with ten thousand to meet
him that cometh against him with
twenty thousand?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 Or else, while the other is yet
a great way off, he sendeth an ambassage,
and desireth conditions of
peace.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 So likewise, whosoever he be
of you that forsaketh not all that he
hath, he cannot be my disciple.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 Salt <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> good: but if the salt have
lost his savour, wherewith shall it be
seasoned?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 It is neither fit for the land, nor
yet for the dunghill; <hi rend='italic'>but</hi> men cast it
out. He that hath ears to hear, let
him hear.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>

<div>
<head>§ 98. Parables of the lost Sheep, &amp;c.
and of the Prodigal Son. <hi rend='italic'>Perea</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XV. 1-32.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Then drew near unto him all the
publicans and sinners for to hear him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And the Pharisees and scribes
murmured, saying, This man receiveth
sinners, and eateth with them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And he spake this parable unto
them, saying,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 What man of you having a hundred
sheep, if he lose one of them,
doth not leave the ninety and nine in
the wilderness, and go after that which
is lost, until he find it?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And when he hath found it, he
layeth <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> on his shoulders, rejoicing.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And when he cometh home, he
calleth together <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> friends and neighbours,
saying unto them, Rejoice with
me; for I have found my sheep which
was lost.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 I say unto you, that likewise joy
shall be in heaven over one sinner
that repenteth, more than over ninety
and nine just persons which need no
repentance.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 Either what woman having ten
pieces of silver, if she lose one piece,
doth not light a candle, and sweep the
house, and seek diligently till she find
<hi rend='italic'>it</hi>?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And when she hath found <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, she
calleth <hi rend='italic'>her</hi> friends and <hi rend='italic'>her</hi> neighbours
together, saying, Rejoice with me; for
I have found the piece which I had
lost.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 Likewise, I say unto you, There
is joy in the presence of the angels of
God over one sinner that repenteth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And he said, A certain man had
two sons:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And the younger of them said
to <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> father, Father, give me the portion
of goods that falleth to <hi rend='italic'>me</hi>. And
he divided unto them <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> living.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And not many days after, the
younger son gathered all together, and
took his journey into a far country,
and there wasted his substance with
riotous living.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And when he had spent all,
there arose a mighty famine in that
land; and he began to be in want.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And he went and joined himself
to a citizen of that country; and he
sent him into his fields to feed swine.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And he would fain have filled
his belly with the husks that the
swine did eat; and no man gave unto
him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And when he came to himself,
he said, How many hired servants of
my father's have bread enough and to
spare, and I perish with hunger!</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 I will arise and go to my father,
and will say unto him, Father, I have
sinned against heaven, and before
thee,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And am no more worthy to be
called thy son: make me as one of thy
hired servants.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And he arose, and came to his
father. But when he was yet a great
way off, his father saw him, and had
compassion, and ran, and fell on his
neck, and kissed him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And the son said unto him,
Father, I have sinned against heaven,
and in thy sight, and am no more
worthy to be called thy son.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 But the father said to his servants,
Bring forth the best robe, and
put it on him; and put a ring on his
hand, and shoes on <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> feet:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And bring hither the fatted calf,
and kill <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>; and let us eat, and be
merry:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 For this my son was dead, and is
alive again; he <hi rend='italic'>was</hi> lost, and is found.
And they began to be merry.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 Now his elder son was in the
field: and as he came and drew nigh
to the house, he heard music and
dancing.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And he called one of the servants,
and asked what these things
meant.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And he said unto him, Thy
brother is come; and thy father hath
killed the fatted calf, because he hath
received him safe and sound.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 And he was angry, and would
not go in; therefore came his father
out, and entreated him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And he, answering, said to <hi rend='italic'>his</hi>
father, Lo, these many years do I
serve thee, neither transgressed I at
any time thy commandment; and yet
thou never gavest me a kid, that I
might make merry with my friends:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 But as soon as this thy son was
came, which hath devoured thy living
with harlots, thou hast killed for him
the fatted calf.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 And he said unto him, Son,
thou art ever with me; and all that
I have is thine.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 It was meet that we should
make merry, and be glad: for this thy
brother was dead, and is alive again;
and was lost, and is found.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>

<div>
<head>§ 99. Parable of the Unjust Steward. <hi rend='italic'>Perea</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVI. 1-13.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>And he said also unto his disciples,
There was a certain rich man which
had a steward; and the same was accused
unto him that he had wasted
his goods.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And he called him, and said unto
him, How is it that I hear this of
thee? give an account of thy stewardship:
for thou mayest be no longer
steward.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 Then the steward said within
himself, What shall I do? for my
lord taketh away from me the stewardship:
I cannot dig; to beg I am
ashamed.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 I am resolved what to do, that
when I am put out of the stewardship,
they may receive me into their
houses.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 So he called every one of his
lord's debtors <hi rend='italic'>unto him</hi>, and said unto
the first, How much owest thou unto
my lord?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And he said, A hundred measures
of oil. And he said unto him, Take
thy bill, and sit down quickly, and
write fifty.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 Then said he to another, And
how much owest thou? And he said,
A hundred measures of wheat. And
he said unto him, Take thy bill, and
write four-score.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And the lord commended the
unjust steward, because he had done
wisely: for the children of this world
are in their generation wiser than the
children of light.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And I say unto you, Make to
yourselves friends of the mammon of
unrighteousness; that when ye fail,
they may receive you into everlasting
habitations.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 He that is faithful in that which
is least, is faithful also in much; and
he that is unjust in the least, is unjust
also in much.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 If therefore ye have not been
faithful in the unrighteous mammon,
who will commit to your trust the true
<hi rend='italic'>riches</hi>?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And if ye have not been faithful
in that which is another man's, who
shall give you that which is your own?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 No servant can serve two masters:
for either he will hate the one,
and love the other; or else he will
hold to the one, and despise the other.
Ye cannot serve God and mammon.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>

<div>
<head>§ 100. The Pharisees reproved. Parable of
the Rich Man and Lazarus. <hi rend='italic'>Perea</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVI. 14-31.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And the Pharisees also, who
were covetous, heard all these things,
and they derided him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And he said unto them, Ye are
they which justify yourselves before
men; but God knoweth your hearts:
for that which is highly esteemed
among men, is abomination in the
sight of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 The law and the prophets <hi rend='italic'>were</hi>
until John: since that time the kingdom
of God is preached, and every
man presseth into it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And it is easier for heaven and
earth to pass, than one tittle of the
law to fail.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 Whosoever putteth away his
wife, and marrieth another, committeth
adultery; and whosoever marrieth
her that is put away from <hi rend='italic'>her</hi>
husband, committeth adultery.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 There was a certain rich man,
which was clothed in purple and fine
linen, and fared sumptuously every
day:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And there was a certain beggar
named Lazarus, which was laid at his
gate, full of sores,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And desiring to be fed with the
crumbs which fell from the rich man's
table: moreover, the dogs came and
licked his sores.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And it came to pass, that the
beggar died, and was carried by the
angels into Abraham's bosom. The
rich man also died, and was buried:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And in hell he lifted up his
eyes, being in torments, and seeth
Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his
bosom.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 And he cried, and said, Father
Abraham, have mercy on me, and
send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip
of his finger in water, and cool my
tongue: for I am tormented in this
flame.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 But Abraham said, Son, remember
that thou in thy lifetime receivedst
thy good things, and likewise
Lazarus evil things: but now he is
comforted, and thou art tormented.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And besides all this, between us
and you there is a great gulf fixed:
so that they which would pass from
hence to you, cannot; neither can
they pass to us, that <hi rend='italic'>would come</hi> from
thence.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 Then he said, I pray thee therefore,
father, that thou wouldest send
him to my father's house:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 For I have five brethren; that
he may testify unto them, lest they
also come into this place of torment.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 Abraham saith unto him, They
have Moses and the prophets, let them
hear them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And he said, Nay, father Abraham:
but if one went unto them from
the dead, they will repent.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 And he said unto him, If they
hear not Moses and the prophets, neither
will they be persuaded, though
one rose from the dead.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>

<div>
<head>§ 101. Jesus inculcates forbearance,
faith, humility. <hi rend='italic'>Perea</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVII. 1-10.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Then said he unto his disciples, It
is impossible but that offences will
come: but wo <hi rend='italic'>unto him</hi> through whom
they come!</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 It were better for him that a
millstone were hanged about his neck,
and he cast into the sea, than that he
should offend one of these little ones.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 Take heed to yourselves: If thy
brother trespass against thee, rebuke
him; and if he repent, forgive him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And if he trespass against thee
seven times in a day, and seven times
in a day turn again to thee, saying, I
repent; thou shalt forgive him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And the apostles said unto the
Lord, Increase our faith.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And the Lord said, If ye had
faith as a grain of mustard-seed, ye
might say unto this sycamine-tree, Be
thou plucked up by the root, and be
thou planted in the sea; and it should
obey you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 But which of you having a servant
ploughing, or feeding cattle, will
say unto him by and by, when he is
come from the field, Go and sit down
to meat?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And will not rather say unto him,
Make ready wherewith I may sup,
and gird thyself, and serve me, till I
have eaten and drunken; and afterward
thou shalt eat and drink?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 Doth he thank that servant, because
he did the things that were
commanded him? I trow not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 So likewise ye, when ye shall
have done all those things which are
commanded you, say, We are unprofitable
servants: we have done that
which was our duty to do.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 102. Christ's coming will be
sudden. <hi rend='italic'>Perea</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVII. 20-37.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And when he was demanded of
the Pharisees, when the kingdom of
God should come, he answered them
and said, The kingdom of God cometh
not with observation.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 Neither shall they say, Lo here!
or, Lo there! for behold, the kingdom
of God is within you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And he said unto the disciples,
The days will come, when ye shall
desire to see one of the days of the
Son of man, and ye shall not see <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And they shall say to you, See
here! or, See there! go not after
<hi rend='italic'>them</hi>, nor follow <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 For as the lightning that lighteneth
out of the one <hi rend='italic'>part</hi> under heaven,
shineth unto the other part under
heaven; so shall also the Son of man
be in his day.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 But first must he suffer many
things, and be rejected of this generation.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And as it was in the days of
Noe, so shall it be also in the days of
the Son of man.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 They did eat, they drank, they
married wives, they were given in
marriage, until the day that Noe entered
into the ark, and the flood came,
and destroyed them all.<note place='foot'>Gen. vii. 4, 7.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 Likewise also as it was in the
days of Lot: they did eat, they drank,
they bought, they sold, they planted,
they builded;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 But the same day that Lot went
out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone
from heaven, and destroyed <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>
all:<note place='foot'>Gen. xix. 15, seq.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 Even thus shall it be in the day
when the Son of man is revealed.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 In that day, he which shall be
upon the house-top, and his stuff in
the house, let him not come down to
take it away: and he that is in the
field, let him likewise not return back.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 Remember Lot's wife.<note place='foot'>Gen xix. 26.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 Whosoever shall seek to save
his life, shall lose it; and whosoever
shall lose his life, shall preserve it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 I tell you, in that night there
shall be two <hi rend='italic'>men</hi> in one bed; the one
shall be taken, and the other shall be
left.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 Two <hi rend='italic'>women</hi> shall be grinding
together; the one shall be taken, and
the other left.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 Two <hi rend='italic'>men</hi> shall be in the field;
the one shall be taken, and the other
left.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 And they answered and said
unto him, Where, Lord? And he said
unto them, Wheresoever the body <hi rend='italic'>is</hi>,
thither will the eagles be gathered
together.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>

<div>
<head>§ 103. Parables. The importunate Widow.
The Pharisee and Publican. <hi rend='italic'>Perea</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVIII. 1-14.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>And he spake a parable unto them
<hi rend='italic'>to this end</hi>, that men ought always <hi rend='italic'>to</hi>
pray, and not to faint;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 Saying, There was in a city a
judge, which feared not God, neither
regarded man.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And there was a widow in that
city; and she came unto him, saying,
Avenge me of mine adversary.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And he would not for a while:
but afterward he said within himself,
Though I fear not God, nor regard
man;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 Yet, because this widow troubleth
me, I will avenge her, lest by her continual
coming she weary me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And the Lord said, Hear what
the unjust judge saith.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And shall not God avenge his
own elect, which cry day and night
unto him, though he bear long with
them?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 I tell you that he will avenge
them speedily. Nevertheless, when
the Son of man cometh, shall he find
faith on the earth?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And he spake this parable unto
certain which trusted in themselves
that they were righteous, and despised
others:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 Two men went up into the
temple to pray; the one a Pharisee,
and the other a publican.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 The Pharisee stood and prayed
thus with himself, God, I thank thee,
that I am not as other men <hi rend='italic'>are</hi>, extortioners,
unjust, adulterers, or even as
this publican.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 I fast twice in the week, I give
tithes of all that I possess.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And the publican, standing afar
off, would not lift up so much as <hi rend='italic'>his</hi>
eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his
breast, saying, God be merciful to me
a sinner.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 I tell you, this man went down
to his house justified <hi rend='italic'>rather</hi> than the
other: for every one that exalteth
himself shall be abased; and he that
humbleth himself shall be exalted.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>

<div>
<head>§ 104. Precepts respecting divorce.
<hi rend='italic'>Perea</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIX. 3-12.<note place='foot'>The two Evangelists go on to relate our Lord's observations about
divorce and marriage; they agree in substance, which is sufficient; though they differ in
the form of the dialogue, neither adhering scrupulously to the exact manner in which the
words passed, though we may learn it, by comparing both. Thus Matt. v. 9, reduces to a
plain assertion, what Mark informs us was a reply to an inquiry made by the disciples
apart. Or, we may suppose with Le Clerc, that this assertion was first advanced to the
Pharisees, and then repeated to the disciples.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note></cell><cell>CH. X. 2-12.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 The Pharisees also came unto
him, tempting him, and saying unto
him, Is it lawful for a man to put
away his wife for every cause?</cell><cell>2 And the Pharisees came to him,
and asked him, Is it lawful for a man
to put away <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> wife? tempting him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And he answered and said unto
them, Have ye not read,<note place='foot'>Gen. i. 27.</note> that he
which made <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> at the beginning,
made them male and female,</cell><cell>3 And he answered and said unto
them, What did Moses command you?</cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And said,<note place='foot'>Gen. ii. 24.</note> For this cause shall a
man leave father and mother, and
shall cleave to his wife: and they
twain shall be one flesh?</cell><cell>4 And they said, Moses suffered to
write a bill of divorcement, and to put
<hi rend='italic'>her</hi> away.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5 And Jesus answered and said
unto them, For the hardness of your
heart, he wrote you this precept:</cell></row>
<row><cell>6 Wherefore they are no more
twain, but one flesh. What therefore
God hath joined together, let not man
put asunder.</cell><cell>6 But from the beginning of the
creation, God made them male and female.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7 They say unto him, Why did
Moses then command to give a writing
of divorcement, and to put her away?<note place='foot'>Deut. xxiv. 1.</note></cell><cell>7 For this cause shall a man leave
his father and mother, and cleave to
his wife;</cell></row>
<row><cell>8 He saith unto them, Moses, because
of the hardness of your hearts,
suffered you to put away your wives:
but from the beginning it was not so.</cell><cell>8 And they twain shall be one flesh:
so then they are not more twain, but one flesh.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>9 What, therefore, God hath joined
together, let not man put asunder.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And I say unto you, Whosoever
shall put away his wife, except <hi rend='italic'>it be</hi> for
fornication, and shall marry another,
committeth adultery; and whoso marrieth
her which is put away, doth
commit adultery.</cell><cell>10 And in the house his disciples
asked him again of the same <hi rend='italic'>matter</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>11 And he saith unto them, Whosoever
shall put away his wife, and
marry another, committeth adultery
against her.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10 His disciples say unto him, If
the case of the man be so with <hi rend='italic'>his</hi>
wife, it is not good to marry.</cell><cell>12 And if a woman shall put away
her husband,<note place='foot'>The practice of divorcing the husband, unwarranted
by the law, had been introduced, as Josephus informs us, (Antiq. XV. vii.
10,) by Salome, sister of Herod the Great, who sent a bill of divorce to her husband
Costobarus; which bad example was afterwards followed by Herodias and others.
Campbell. This natural allusion to an existing illegal custom is in perfect harmony
with the whole history, it being true; but it seldom if ever has a parallel in the annals
of forgery.</note> and be married to another,
she committeth adultery.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11 But he said unto them, All <hi rend='italic'>men</hi>
cannot receive this saying, save <hi rend='italic'>they</hi>
to whom it is given.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 For there are some eunuchs,
which were so born from <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> mother's
womb: and there are some eunuchs,
which were made eunuchs of men:
and there be eunuchs, which have
made themselves eunuchs for the
kingdom of heaven's sake. He that
is able to receive <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, let him receive it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>

<div>
<head>§ 105. Jesus receives and blesses little
children. <hi rend='italic'>Perea</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIX. 13-15.</cell><cell>CH. X. 13-16.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13 Then were there brought unto
him little children, that he should put
<hi rend='italic'>his</hi> hands on them, and pray: and the
disciples rebuked them.</cell><cell>13 And they brought young children
to him, that he should touch them; and
<hi rend='italic'>his</hi> disciples rebuked those that brought
<hi rend='italic'>them</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell>14 But Jesus said, Suffer little
children, and forbid them not, to come
unto me: for of such is the kingdom
of heaven.</cell><cell>14 But when Jesus saw <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, he was
much displeased, and said unto them,
Suffer the little children to come unto
me, and forbid them not: for of such
is the kingdom of God.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15 Verily I say unto you, Whosoever
shall not receive the kingdom of
God as a little child, he shall not enter
therein.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And he laid <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> hands on them,
and departed thence.</cell><cell>16 And he took them up in his
arms; put <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> hands upon them, and
blessed them.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVIII. 15-17.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And they brought unto him also
infants, that he would touch them:
but when <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> disciples saw <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, they
rebuked them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 But Jesus called them <hi rend='italic'>unto him</hi>,
and said, Suffer little children to come
unto me, and forbid them not: for of
such is the kingdom of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 Verily, I say unto you, Whosoever
shall not receive the kingdom of
God as a little child, shall in no wise
enter therein.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 106. The rich young man. Parable of the
Laborers in the Vineyard. <hi rend='italic'>Perea</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIX. 16-30. CH. XX 1-16.</cell><cell>CH. X. 17-31.</cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And behold, one came and said
unto him, Good Master, what good
thing shall I do that I may have
eternal life?</cell><cell>17 And when he was gone forth
into the way, there came one running,
and kneeled to him, and asked him,
Good Master, what shall I do that I
may inherit eternal life?</cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And he said unto him, Why
callest thou me good? <hi rend='italic'>there is</hi> none
good but one, <hi rend='italic'>that is</hi>, God: but if thou
wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.</cell><cell>18 And Jesus said unto him, Why
callest thou me good? <hi rend='italic'>there is</hi> none
good, but one, <hi rend='italic'>that is</hi> God.</cell></row>
<row><cell>18 He saith unto him, Which?
Jesus said, Thou shalt do no murder.
Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou
shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear
false witness,</cell><cell>19 Thou knowest the commandments,
Do not commit adultery, Do
not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear
false witness, Defraud not, Honour
thy father and mother.</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 Honour thy father and <hi rend='italic'>thy</hi> mother:
and, Thou shalt love thy neighbour
as thyself.<note place='foot'>Ex. xx. 12, seq. Lev. xix. 18.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 The young man saith unto him,
All these things have I kept from my
youth up: what lack I yet?</cell><cell>20 And he answered and said unto
him, Master, all these have I observed
from my youth.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21 Jesus said unto him, If thou wilt
be perfect, go and sell that thou hast,
and give to the poor, and thou shalt
have treasure in heaven: and come
<hi rend='italic'>and</hi> follow me.</cell><cell>21 Then Jesus beholding him, loved
him, and said unto him, One thing
thou lackest: go thy way, sell whatsoever
thou hast, and give to the
poor, and thou shalt have treasure in
heaven; and come, take up the cross,
and follow me.</cell></row>
<row><cell>22 But when the young man heard
that saying, he went away sorrowful:
for he had great possessions.</cell><cell>22 And he was sad at that saying,
and went away grieved: for he had
great possessions.</cell></row>
<row><cell>23 Then said Jesus unto his disciples,
Verily, I say unto you, That a
rich man shall hardly enter into the
kingdom of heaven.</cell><cell>23 And Jesus looked round about,
and saith unto his disciples, How
hardly shall they that have riches
enter into the kingdom of God!</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>24 And the disciples were astonished
at his words. But Jesus answereth
again, and saith unto them, Children,
how hard is it for them that trust in
riches to enter into the kingdom of
God!</cell></row>
<row><cell>24 And again I say unto you, It is
easier for a camel to go through the
eye of a needle, than for a rich man
to enter into the kingdom of God.</cell><cell>25 It is easier for a camel to go
through the eye of a needle, than for
a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.</cell></row>
<row><cell>25 When his disciples heard <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>,
they were exceedingly amazed, saying
Who then can be saved?</cell><cell>26 And they were astonished out
of measure, saying among themselves,
Who then can be saved?</cell></row>
<row><cell>26 But Jesus beheld <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>, and said
unto them, With men this is impossible,
but with God all things are possible.</cell><cell>27 And Jesus, looking upon them,
With men <hi rend='italic'>it is</hi> impossible, but
not with God: for with God all things
are possible.</cell></row>
<row><cell>27 Then answered Peter, and said
unto him, Behold, we have forsaken
all, and followed thee; what shall we
have therefore?</cell><cell>28 Then Peter began to say unto
him, Lo, we have left all, and have
followed thee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>28 And Jesus said unto them, Verily,
I say unto you, That ye which have
followed me in the regeneration, when
the Son of man shall sit in the throne
of his glory, ye also shall sit upon
twelve thrones, judging the twelve
tribes of Israel.</cell><cell>29 And Jesus answered and said,
Verily I say unto you, There is no
man that hath left house, or brethren,
or sisters, or father, or mother, or
wife, or children, or lands, for my
sake, and the gospel's,</cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And every one that hath forsaken
houses, or brethren, or sisters,
or father, or mother, or wife, or children,
or lands, for my name's sake,
shall receive a hundred-fold, and shall
inherit everlasting life.</cell><cell>30 But he shall receive a hundred-fold
now in this time, houses, and
brethren, and sisters, and mothers,
and children, and lands, with persecutions;
and in the world to come,
eternal life.</cell></row>
<row><cell>30 But many <hi rend='italic'>that are</hi> first shall be
last, and the last <hi rend='italic'>shall be</hi> first.</cell><cell>31 But many <hi rend='italic'>that are</hi> first shall be
last; and the last first.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XX.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>For the kingdom of heaven is like
unto a man <hi rend='italic'>that is</hi> a householder,
which went out early in the morning
to hire labourers into his vineyard.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And when he had agreed with the
labourers for a penny a day, he sent
them into his vineyard.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And he went out about the third
hour, and saw others standing idle in
the market-place,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And said unto them, Go ye also
into the vineyard; and whatsoever is
right, I will give you. And they went
their way.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 Again he went out about the sixth
and ninth hour, and did likewise.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And about the eleventh hour he
went out, and found others standing
idle, and saith unto them, Why stand
ye here all the day idle?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 They say unto him, Because no
man hath hired us. He saith unto
them, Go ye also into the vineyard;
and whatsoever is right, <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> shall ye
receive.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 So when evening was come, the
lord of the vineyard saith unto his
steward, Call the labourers, and give
them <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> hire, beginning from the
last unto the first.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And when they came that <hi rend='italic'>were
hired</hi> about the eleventh hour, they
received every man a penny.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 But when the first came, they
supposed that they should have received
more; and they likewise received
every man a penny.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And when they had received <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>,
they murmured against the good man
of the house,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 Saying, These last have wrought
<hi rend='italic'>but</hi> one hour, and thou hast made them
equal unto us, which have borne the
burden and heat of the day.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 But he answered one of them, and
said, Friend, I do thee no wrong: didst
not thou agree with me for a penny?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 Take <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> thine <hi rend='italic'>is</hi>, and go thy
way: I will give unto this last, even
as unto thee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 Is it not lawful for me to do
what I will with mine own? is thine
eye evil because I am good?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 So the last shall be first, and the
first last: for many be called, but few
chosen.</cell><cell></cell></row>

</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVIII. 18-30.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 And a certain ruler asked him,
saying, Good Master, what shall I do
to inherit eternal life?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And Jesus said unto him, Why
callest thou me good? none <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> good,
save one, <hi rend='italic'>that is</hi> God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 Thou knowest the commandments,
Do not commit adultery, Do
not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear
false witness, Honour thy father and
thy mother.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And he said, All these have I
kept from my youth up.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 Now, when Jesus heard these
things, he said unto him, Yet lackest
thou one thing: sell all that thou hast,
and distribute unto the poor, and thou
shalt have treasure in heaven: and
come, follow me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And when he heard this, he was
very sorrowful: for he was very rich.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 And when Jesus saw that he was
very sorrowful, he said, How hardly
shall they that have riches enter into
the kingdom of God!</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 For it is easier for a camel to
go through a needle's eye, than for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of
God!</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And they that heard <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, said, Who
then can be saved?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And he said, The things which
are impossible with men, are possible
with God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 Then Peter said, Lo, we have
left all, and followed thee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And he said unto them, Verily, I
say unto you, There is no man that hath
left house, or parents, or brethren, or
wife, or children, for the kingdom of
God's sake,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 Who shall not receive manifold
more in this present time, and in the
world to come life everlasting.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>

<div>
<head>§ 107. Jesus a third time foretels his Death
and Resurrection. (See § 74, § 77.) <hi rend='italic'>Perea</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XX. 17-19.</cell><cell>CH. X. 32-34.</cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And Jesus, going up to Jerusalem,
took the twelve disciples apart in
the way, and said unto them,</cell><cell>32 And they were in the way, going
up to Jerusalem; and Jesus went
before them: and they were amazed;
and as they followed, they were afraid.
And he took again the twelve, and
began to tell them what things should
happen unto him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>18 Behold, we go up to Jerusalem;
and the Son of man shall be betrayed
unto the chief priests, and unto the
scribes, and they shall condemn him
to death,</cell><cell>33 <hi rend='italic'>Saying</hi>, Behold, we go up to
Jerusalem; and the Son of man shall
be delivered unto the chief priests,
and unto the scribes; and they shall
condemn him to death, and shall deliver
him to the Gentiles;</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And shall deliver him to the
Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and
to crucify <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>: and the third day he
shall rise again.</cell><cell>34 And they shall mock him, and
shall scourge him, and shall spit upon
him, and shall kill him: and the third
day he shall rise again.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVIII. 31-34.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 Then he took <hi rend='italic'>unto him</hi> the
twelve, and said unto them, Behold,
we go up to Jerusalem, and all things
that are written by the prophets concerning
the Son of man shall be accomplished.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 For he shall be delivered unto
the Gentiles, and shall be mocked,
and spitefully entreated, and spitted
on;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 And they shall scourge <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, and
put him to death: and the third day he
shall rise again.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 And they understood none of
these things: and this saying was
hid from them, neither knew they the
things which were spoken.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 108. James and John prefer their ambitious
request. <hi rend='italic'>Perea</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XX. 20-28.</cell><cell>CH. X. 35-45.</cell></row>
<row><cell>20 Then came to him the mother
of Zebedee's children, with her sons,
worshipping <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, and desiring a certain
thing of him.</cell><cell>35 And James and John, the sons
of Zebedee, come unto him, saying,
Master, we would that thou shouldest
do for us whatsoever we shall desire.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And he said unto her, What wilt
thou? She saith<note place='foot'>As all three came to Jesus, the action of the sons expressed,
that they joined in the petition uttered by the mother. They are therefore represented as
saying what was said with their consent, and probably by their suggestion. Luke xix. 11,
will show how suitable this request was to the time, according to the ideas of our Lord's
disciples. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note> unto him, Grant that
these my two sons may sit, the one on
thy right hand, and the other on the
left, in thy kingdom.</cell><cell>36 And he said unto them, What
would ye that I should do for you?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>37 They said unto him, Grant unto
us that we may sit, one on thy right
hand, and the other on thy left hand,
in thy glory.</cell></row>
<row><cell>22 But Jesus answered and said,
Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye
able to drink of the cup that I shall
drink of, and to be baptized with the
baptism that I am baptized with?
They say unto him, We are able.</cell><cell>38 But Jesus said unto them, Ye
know not what ye ask: can ye drink
of the cup that I drink of? and be
baptized with the baptism that I am
baptized with?</cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And he saith unto them, Ye
shall drink indeed of my cup, and be
baptized with the baptism that I am
baptized with; but, to sit on my right
hand, and on my left, is not mine to
give, but <hi rend='italic'>it shall be given to them</hi> for
whom it is prepared of my Father.</cell><cell>39 And they said unto him, We
can. And Jesus said unto them, Ye
shall indeed drink of the cup that I
drink of; and with the baptism that
I am baptized withal shall ye be baptized:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>40 But to sit on my right hand and
on my left hand, is not mine to give;
but <hi rend='italic'>it shall be given to them</hi> for whom
it is prepared.</cell></row>
<row><cell>24 And when the ten heard <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, they
were moved with indignation against
the two brethren.</cell><cell>41 And when the ten heard <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, they
began to be much displeased with
James and John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>25 But Jesus called them <hi rend='italic'>unto him</hi>,
and said, Ye know that the princes of
the Gentiles exercise dominion over
them, and they that are great exercise
authority upon them.</cell><cell>42 But Jesus called them <hi rend='italic'>to him</hi>,
and saith unto them, Ye know that
they which are accounted to rule over
the Gentiles, exercise lordship over
them; and their great ones exercise
authority upon them.</cell></row>
<row><cell>26 But it shall not be so among you:
but whosoever will be great among
you, let him be your minister;</cell><cell>43 But so shall it not be among you:
but whosoever will be great among
you, shall be your minister:</cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And whosoever will be chief
among you, let him be your servant:</cell><cell>44 And whosoever of you will be
the chiefest, shall be servant of all.</cell></row>
<row><cell>28 Even as the Son of man came
not to be ministered unto, but to minister,
and to give his life a ransom
for many.</cell><cell>45 For even the Son of man came
not to be ministered unto, but to minister,
and to give his life a ransom
for many.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>

<div>
<head>§ 109. The healing of two
blind men near Jericho.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XX. 29-34.</cell><cell>CH. X. 46-52.</cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And as they departed from Jericho,
a great multitude followed him.</cell><cell>46 And they came to Jericho: and
as he went out of Jericho with his
disciples, and a great number of people,
blind Bartimeus, the son of Timeus,
sat by the highway side, begging.</cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And behold, two blind men sitting
by the wayside, when they heard
that Jesus passed by, cried out, saying,
Have mercy on us, O Lord, <hi rend='italic'>thou</hi> son of
David.</cell><cell>47 And when he heard that it was
Jesus of Nasareth, he began to cry
out and say, Jesus, <hi rend='italic'>thou</hi> son of David,
have mercy on me.</cell></row>
<row><cell>31 And the multitude rebuked
them, because they should hold their
peace: but they cried the more, saying,
Have mercy on us, O Lord, <hi rend='italic'>thou</hi>
son of David.</cell><cell>48 And many charged him that he
should hold his peace: but he cried
the more a great deal, <hi rend='italic'>Thou</hi> son of
David, have mercy on me.</cell></row>
<row><cell>32 And Jesus stood still, and called them, and said, What will ye that
I shall do unto you?</cell><cell>49 And Jesus stood still, and commanded
him to be called: and they
call the blind man, saying unto him,
Be of good comfort, rise; he calleth thee.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>50 And he, casting away his garment,
rose, and came to Jesus.</cell></row>
<row><cell>33 They say unto him, Lord, that
our eyes may be opened.</cell><cell>51 And Jesus answered and said
unto him, What wilt thou that I
should do unto thee? The blind man
said unto him, Lord, that I might
receive my sight.</cell></row>
<row><cell>34 So Jesus had compassion <hi rend='italic'>on
them</hi>, and touched their eyes: and immediately
their eyes received sight,
and they followed him.</cell><cell>52 And Jesus said unto him, Go
thy way; thy faith hath made thee
whole. And immediately he received
his sight, and followed Jesus in the way.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVIII. 35-43. CH. XIX. 1.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 And it came to pass, that as he
was come nigh<note place='foot'><p>According to St. Mark, Jesus comes to Jericho; by which
may be meant that he is a temporary inhabitant of that city. See Mark vi. 1, and viii. 22.
Jesus therefore may be represented, (Matt. xx. 29; Mark x. 46,) not as <emph>finally leaving</emph>
Jericho for Jerusalem, but as <emph>occasionally going out</emph> of Jericho; in which city he had
made some abode, it matters not for how few days. See Mark xi. 19. Jericho was a very
considerable city; and we do not read that it was visited by our Lord at any other time.
We may therefore suppose that Jesus, accompanied by his disciples and the multitude, and
intent on his great work of propagating the gospel, went out of this city, knowing that
a fit occasion of working a miracle would present itself; and that on his return, as
he drew nigh unto Jericho, (Luke xviii. 35,) he restored the blind men to sight. It is
likewise probable that Jesus, having given this proof of his divine mission, or foreseeing
that so great a miracle would create too much attention in the people, prudently and
humbly passed through Jericho on his return to it, (Luke xix. 1,) and continued his
journey to Jerusalem.
</p>
<p>
As to the remaining difficulty, that Matthew mentions two blind men, and the other
Evangelists only one, I must refer to Le Clerc's maxim, before quoted; (see § 57, note):
adding that Bartimeus may have been the more remarkable of the two, and the more
eminent for his faith in Jesus. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</p></note> unto Jericho, a certain
blind man sat by the wayside
begging;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 And hearing the multitude pass
by, he asked what it meant.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 And they told him, that Jesus
of Nazareth passeth by.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 And he cried, saying, Jesus, <hi rend='italic'>thou</hi>
son of David, have mercy on me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 And they which went before
rebuked him, that he should hold his
peace: but he cried so much the
more, <hi rend='italic'>Thou</hi> son of David, have mercy
on me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 And Jesus stood and commanded
him to be brought unto him: and when
he was come near, he asked him,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 Saying, What wilt thou that I
shall do unto thee? And he said,
Lord, that I may receive my sight.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 And Jesus said unto him, Receive
thy sight: thy faith hath saved
thee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 And immediately he received his
sight, and followed him, glorifying God:
and all the people, when they saw <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>,
gave praise unto God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIX.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>And <hi rend='italic'>Jesus</hi> entered and passed
through Jericho.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>

<div>
<head>§ 110. The visit to Zaccheus. Parable of
the ten Minæ. <hi rend='italic'>Jericho</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIX. 2-28.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And behold <hi rend='italic'>there was</hi> a man
named Zaccheus, which was the
chief among the publicans, and he
was rich.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And he sought to see Jesus who
he was; and could not for the press,
because he was little of stature.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And he ran before, and climbed
up into a sycamore-tree to see him;
for he was to pass that <hi rend='italic'>way</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And when Jesus came to the
place, he looked up, and saw him, and
said unto him, Zaccheus, make haste,
and come down: for to-day I must
abide at thy house.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And he made haste, and came
down, and received him joyfully.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And when they saw <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, they all
murmured, saying, That he was gone
to be guest with a man that is a
sinner.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And Zaccheus stood, and said
unto the Lord; Behold, Lord, the
half of my goods I give to the poor;
and if I have taken any thing from
any man, by false accusation, I restore
<hi rend='italic'>him</hi> four-fold.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And Jesus said unto him, This
day is salvation come to this house,
forasmuch as he also is a son of Abraham.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 For the Son of man is come to
seek and to save that which was lost.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And as they heard these things,
he added and spake a parable, because
he was nigh to Jerusalem, and because
they thought that the kingdom of God
should immediately appear.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 He said therefore, A certain nobleman
went into a far country to
receive for himself a kingdom, and to
return.<note place='foot'>Here is a fine allusion to historical facts, first observed by Le Clerc.
<q>Thus Herod the Great solicited the kingdom of Judea at Rome, (Jos. Antiq. Jud.
XIV. xiv. 4, 5; XV. vi. 6, 7,) and was appointed king by the interest of Anthony
with the senate; and afterwards he sailed to Rhodes, divested himself of his diadem,
and received it again from Augustus. In like manner his sons Archelaus and Antipas
repaired to the imperial city, that they might obtain the kingdom on their father's
death; and we read, (Jos. Antiq. Jud. XIV. xi. 1, and xiii. 2,) that the Jews sent
an embassy thither, with accusations against Archelaus.</q> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>, Obs. on our
Lord, p. 83.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And he called his ten servants,
and delivered them ten pounds, and
said unto them, Occupy till I come.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 But his citizens hated him, and
sent a message after him, saying, We
will not have this <hi rend='italic'>man</hi> to reign over
us.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And it came to pass, that when
he was returned, having received the
kingdom, then he commanded these
servants to be called unto him, to
whom he had given the money, that
he might know how much every man
had gained by trading.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 Then came the first, saying,
Lord, thy pound hath gained ten
pounds.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And he said unto him, Well,
thou good servant: because thou hast
been faithful in a very little, have
thou authority over ten cities.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 And the second came, saying,
Lord, thy pound hath gained five
pounds.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And he said likewise to him, Be
thou also over five cities.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And another came, saying, Lord,
behold <hi rend='italic'>here is</hi> thy pound, which I have
kept laid up in a napkin:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 For I feared thee, because thou
art an austere man: thou takest up
that thou layedst not down, and reapest
that thou didst not sow.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And he saith unto him, Out of
thine own mouth will I judge thee,
<hi rend='italic'>thou</hi> wicked servant. Thou knewest
that I was an austere man, taking up
that I laid not down, and reaping that
I did not sow:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 Wherefore then gavest not thou
my money into the bank, that at my
coming I might have required mine
own with usury?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 And he said unto them that
stood by, Take from him the pound,
and give <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> to him that hath ten
pounds.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 (And they said unto him, Lord,
he hath ten pounds.)</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 For I say unto you, That unto
every one which hath, shall be given;
and from him that hath not, even that
he hath shall be taken away from
him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 But those mine enemies, which
would not that I should reign over
them, bring hither, and slay <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> before
me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 And when he had thus spoken,
he went before, ascending up to Jerusalem.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>

<div>
<head>§ 111. Jesus arrives at Bethany six days
before the Passover. <hi rend='italic'>Bethany</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XI. 55-57. CH. XII. 1, 9-11.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>55 And the Jews' passover was
nigh at hand: and many went out of
the country up to Jerusalem before
the passover, to purify themselves.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>56 Then sought they for Jesus,
and spake among themselves, as they
stood in the temple, What think ye,
that he will not come to the feast?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>57 Now both the chief priests and
the Pharisees had given a commandment,
that, if any man knew where
he were, he should shew <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, that they
might take him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XII.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Then</hi> Jesus, six days before the
passover, came to Bethany, where
Lazarus was which had been dead,
whom he raised from the dead.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 Much people of the Jews therefore
knew that he was there: and
they came, not for Jesus' sake only,
but that they might see Lazarus also,
whom he had raised from the dead.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 But the chief priests consulted
that they might put Lazarus also to
death;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 Because that by reason of him
many of the Jews went away, and
believed on Jesus.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part VII. Our Lord's Public Entry Into Jerusalem,
And The Subsequent Transactions Before The Fourth Passover.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Time.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Five days.</hi>
</p>

<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>

<div>
<head>§ 112. Our Lord's public entry into Jerusalem.
(First Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Bethany. Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXI. 1-11, 14-17.</cell><cell>CH. XI. 1-11.</cell></row>
<row><cell>And when they drew nigh unto
Jerusalem, and were come to Bethphage,
unto the mount of Olives, then
sent Jesus two disciples,</cell><cell>And when they came nigh to Jerusalem,
unto Bethphage, and Bethany,
at the mount of Olives, he sendeth
forth two of his disciples,</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 Saying unto them, Go into the
village over against you, and straightway
ye shall find an <hi rend='italic'>ass</hi> tied, and a
colt with her: loose <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>, and bring
<hi rend='italic'>them</hi> unto me.</cell><cell>2 And saith unto them, Go your
way into the village over against you:
and as soon as ye be entered into it,
ye shall find a colt tied, whereon never
man sat; loose him, and bring <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And if any <hi rend='italic'>man</hi> say aught unto
you, ye shall say, The Lord hath
need of them; and straightway he
will send them.</cell><cell>3 And if any man say unto you,
Why do ye this? say ye that the
Lord hath need of him; and straightway
he will send him hither.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4 All this was done, that it might
be fulfilled which was spoken by the
prophet, saying,<note place='foot'>Zech. ix. 9.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 Tell ye the daughter of Sion,
Behold, thy King cometh unto thee,
meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a
colt the foal of an ass.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And the disciples went, and did
as Jesus commanded them,</cell><cell>4 And they went their way and
found the colt tied by the door without,
in a place where two ways met;
and they loose him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5 And certain of them that stood
there said unto them, What do ye,
loosing the colt?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>6 And they said unto them even
as Jesus had commanded: and they
let them go.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And brought the ass and the colt,
and put on them their clothes,<note place='foot'>Thus acknowledging him to be their
king; for this was a custom observed by the people when they found that God had
appointed a man to the kingdom. When Jehu was anointed King by Elisha the
prophet, at the command of God, and his captains knew what was done, <hi rend='italic'>every man
took his garment and spread it under him on the top of the steps, and blew the trumpets,
saying Jehu is king</hi>. 2 King ix. 13. <hi rend='smallcaps'>A. Clarke</hi>. See <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jennings</hi>, Ant. vol. ii.
p. 245. <q><hi rend='italic'>Thereon</hi>,</q> that is, on the garments. The princes of Israel were forbidden
to multiply <emph>horses</emph> to themselves. Deut. xvii. 16, and xx. 1. This law was imposed
as a standing mark of distinction between them and other nations; and a trial of
prince and people, whether they had confidence in God their deliverer, who wanted
neither horses nor footmen to fight his battles. It was observed for near four hundred
years, until some time in the reign of Solomon; for David himself rode on a mule; as
did Solomon also on the day of his coronation. 1 Kings i. 33, 34. See Judges x. 4,
and xii. 14; 1 Saml. xxv. 20. Subsequently the kings of Israel and Judah violated
this command, by copying the example of the neighbouring princes in the establishment
of their cavalry. The displeasure of God for this offence is indicated by several of the
prophets: Isaiah ii. 6, 7, and xxxi. 1; Hosea xiv. 3, and i. 7; Micah v. 10, 11.&mdash;In opposition
to the character of these warlike and disobedient princes, it was predicted that
Messiah would come as a just king, having salvation;&mdash;a deliverer&mdash;riding upon an ass,
after the manner of the ancient deliverers of Israel, who came only in the strength and
power of the Lord. Zech. ix. 9. See Bishop <hi rend='smallcaps'>Sherlock's</hi> Dissert. IV. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Michaelis</hi>, vol. ii.
pp. 439-449.</note> and
they set <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> thereon.</cell><cell>7 And they brought the colt to
Jesus, and cast their garments on
him; and he sat upon him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And a very great multitude
spread their garments in the way:
others cut down branches from the
trees, and strewed <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> in the way.</cell><cell>8 And many spread their garments
in the way: and others cut down
branches off the trees, and strewed
<hi rend='italic'>them</hi> in the way.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And the multitudes that went
before, and that followed, cried, saying,
Hosanna to the Son of David:
Blessed <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> he that cometh in the name
of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest.</cell><cell>9 And they that went before, and
they that followed, cried, saying,
Hosanna: Blessed <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> he that cometh
in the name of the Lord.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>10 Blessed <hi rend='italic'>be</hi> the kingdom of our
father David, that cometh in the name
of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And when he was come into
Jerusalem, all the city was moved,
saying, Who is this?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And the multitude said, This
is Jesus the prophet of Nazareth of
Galilee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And the blind and the lame
came to him in the temple; and he
healed them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And when the chief priests
and scribes saw the wonderful things
that he did, and the children crying
in the temple, and saying, Hosanna
to the son of David; they were sore
displeased,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And said unto him, Hearest
thou what these say? And Jesus
saith unto them, Yea: have ye never
read, Out of the mouth of babes and
sucklings thou hast perfected praise?<note place='foot'>Ps. viii. 3.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And he left them, and went out
of the city into Bethany, and he
lodged there.</cell><cell>11 And Jesus entered into Jerusalem,
and into the temple: and when
he had looked round about upon all
things, and now the even-tide was
come, he went out unto Bethany, with
the twelve.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIX. 29-44.</cell><cell>CH. XII. 12-19.</cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And it came to pass, when he
was come nigh to Bethphage and
Bethany, at the mount called <hi rend='italic'>the
mount</hi> of Olives, he sent two of his
disciples,</cell><cell>12 On the next day, much people that were come to the feast,
when they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,</cell></row>
<row><cell>30 Saying, Go ye into the village
over against <hi rend='italic'>you</hi>; in the which at
your entering ye shall find a colt tied,
whereon yet never man sat: loose
him, and bring <hi rend='italic'>him hither</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 And if any man ask you, Why
do ye loose <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>? thus shall ye say
unto him, Because the Lord hath need
of him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 And they that were sent went
their way, and found even as he had
said unto them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 And as they were loosing the
colt, the owners thereof said unto
them, Why loose ye the colt?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 And they said, The Lord hath
need of him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 And they brought him to Jesus:
and they cast their garments upon the
colt and they set Jesus thereon.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 And as he went, they spread
their clothes in the way.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 And when he was come nigh,
even now at the descent of the mount
of Olives, the whole multitude of the
disciples began to rejoice and praise
God with a loud voice for all the
mighty works that they had seen;</cell><cell>13 Took branches of palm-trees,
and went forth to meet him, and cried,
Hosanna; Blessed <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> the King of
Israel that cometh in the name of the
Lord.<note place='foot'>Ps. cxviii. 26.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 Saying, Blessed <hi rend='italic'>be</hi> the King
that cometh in the name of the Lord:
Peace in heaven, and glory in the
highest.</cell><cell>14 And Jesus, when he had found
a young ass, sat thereon; as it is written,</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15 Fear not, daughter of Sion:
behold, thy King cometh, sitting on
an ass's colt.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>16 These things understood not his
disciples at the first: but when Jesus
was glorified, then remembered they
that these things were written of him,
and <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> they had done these things
unto him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17 The people therefore that was
with him when he called Lazarus out
of his grave, and raised him from the
dead, bare record.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18 For this cause the people also
met him, for that they heard that he
had done this miracle.</cell></row>
<row><cell>39 And some of the Pharisees from
among the multitude said unto him,
Master, rebuke thy disciples.</cell><cell>19 The Pharisees therefore said
among themselves, Perceive ye how
ye prevail nothing? behold, the world
is gone after him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>40 And he answered and said unto
them, I tell you, that if these should
hold their peace, the stones would
immediately cry out.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 And when he was come near, he
beheld the city, and wept over it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 Saying, If thou hadst known,
even thou, at least in this thy day,
the things <hi rend='italic'>which belong</hi> unto thy
peace! but now they are hid from
thine eyes.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 For the days shall come upon
thee, that thine enemies shall cast
a trench about thee, and compass
thee round, and keep thee in on every
side,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 And shall lay thee even with
the ground, and thy children within
thee: and they shall not leave in thee
one stone upon another: because thou
knewest not the time of thy visitation.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>

<div>
<head>§ 113. The barren Fig-tree. The cleansing of the
Temple. (Second Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Bethany. Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXI. 12, 13, 18, 19.</cell><cell>CH. XI. 12-19.</cell></row>
<row><cell>18 Now in the morning, as he returned
into the city, he hungered.</cell><cell>12 And on the morrow, when they were come
from Bethany, he was hungry.</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And when he saw a fig-tree in
the way, he came to it, and found
nothing thereon, but leaves only, and
said unto it, Let no fruit grow on thee
henceforward for ever. And presently
the fig-tree withered away.</cell><cell>13 And seeing a fig-tree afar off,
having leaves, he came, if haply he
might find any thing thereon: and
when he came to it, he found nothing
but leaves: for the time of figs was
not <hi rend='italic'>yet</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14 And Jesus answered and said unto
it, No man eat fruit of thee hereafter
for ever. And his disciples heard <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And Jesus went into the temple
of God, and cast out all them that
sold and bought in the temple, and
overthrew the tables of the money-changers,
and the seats of them that
sold doves,</cell><cell>15 And they come to Jerusalem:
and Jesus went into the temple, and
began to cast out them that sold and
bought in the temple, and overthrew
the tables of the money-changers, and
the seats of them that sold doves:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>16 And would not suffer that any
man should carry <hi rend='italic'>any</hi> vessel through
the temple.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And said unto them, It is written,<note place='foot'>Isa. lvi. 7. Jer. vii. 11.</note>
My house shall be called the
house of prayer, but ye have made it
a den of thieves.</cell><cell>17 And he taught, saying unto
them, Is it not written, My house
shall be called, of all nations, the house
of prayer? but ye have made it a den
of thieves.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18 And the scribes and chief priests
heard <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, and sought how they might
destroy him: for they feared him,
because all the people was astonished
at his doctrine.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>19 And when even was come, he
went out of the city.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIX. 45-48. CH. XXI. 37, 38.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 And he went into the temple,
and began to cast out them that sold
therein, and them that bought,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46 Saying unto them, It is written,
My house is the house of prayer, but
ye have made it a den of thieves.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>47 And he taught daily in the
temple. But the chief priests, and
the scribes, and the chief of the people
sought to destroy him,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>48 And could not find what they
might do: for all the people were
very attentive to hear him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXI.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 And in the day-time he was
teaching in the temple; and at night
he went out, and abode in the mount
that is called <hi rend='italic'>the mount</hi> of Olives.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 And all the people came early
in the morning to him in the temple,
for to hear him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 114. The barren Fig-tree withers away.
(Third Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Between Bethany and Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXI. 20-22.</cell><cell>CH. XI. 20-26.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20 And in the morning, as they
passed by, they saw the fig-tree dried
up from the roots.</cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And when the disciples<note place='foot'>Matth. xxi. 20, <hi rend='italic'>the disciples</hi>. Mark xi. 21, <hi rend='italic'>Peter</hi>. These may be thus reconciled.
Peter addresses himself to Jesus: the disciples turn their attention to the object;
Jesus addresses all. Or, Peter's remark may be attributed to all the disciples. See
§ 141. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note> saw <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>,
they marvelled, saying, How soon is
the fig-tree withered away!</cell><cell>21 And Peter calling to remembrance, saith
unto him, Master, behold, the fig-tree which thou cursed is withered away.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21 Jesus answered and said unto
them, Verily, I say unto you, If ye
have faith, and doubt not, ye shall
not only do this <hi rend='italic'>which is done</hi> to the
fig-tree, but also, if ye shall say unto
this mountain, Be thou removed, and
be thou cast into the sea; it shall be
done.</cell><cell>22 And Jesus answering, saith unto
them, Have faith in God.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>23 For verily I say unto you, That
whosoever shall say unto this mountain,
Be thou removed, and be thou
cast into the sea; and shall not doubt
in his heart, but shall believe that
those things which he saith shall
come to pass; he shall have whatsoever
he saith.</cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And all things whatsoever ye
shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall
receive.</cell><cell>24 Therefore I say unto you, What
things soever ye desire when ye pray,
believe that ye receive <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>, and ye
shall have <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>25 And when ye stand praying,
forgive, if ye have aught against
any: that your Father also which is
in heaven may forgive you your trespasses.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>26 But if ye do not forgive, neither
will your Father which is in heaven
forgive your trespasses.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>

<div>
<head>§ 115. Christ's authority questioned. Parable of the
two Sons. (Third Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXI. 23-32.</cell><cell>CH. XI. 27-33.</cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And when he was come into
the temple, the chief priests and the
elders of the people came unto him
as he was teaching, and said, By
what authority doest thou these
things? and who gave thee this authority?</cell><cell>27 And they come again to Jerusalem:
and as he was walking in the
temple, there come to him the chief
priests, and the scribes, and the elders,</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>28 And say unto him, By what authority
doest thou these things? and
who gave thee this authority to do
these things?</cell></row>
<row><cell>24 And Jesus answered and said
unto them, I also will ask you one
thing, which if ye tell me, I in like
wise will tell you by what authority I
do these things.</cell><cell>29 And Jesus answered and said
unto them, I will also ask of you one
question, and answer me, and I will
tell you by what authority I do these things.</cell></row>
<row><cell>25 The baptism of John, whence
was it? from heaven, or of men?
And they reasoned with themselves,
saying, If we shall say, From heaven;
he will say unto us, Why did ye not
then believe him?</cell><cell>30 The baptism of John, was <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>
from heaven, or of men? answer me.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31 And they reasoned with themselves,
saying, If we shall say, From
heaven; he will say, Why then did ye
not believe him?</cell></row>
<row><cell>26 But if we shall say, Of men;
we fear the people: for all hold John
as a prophet.</cell><cell>32 But if we shall say, Of men;
they feared the people: for all <hi rend='italic'>men</hi>
counted John, that he was a prophet indeed.</cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And they answered Jesus, and
said, We cannot tell. And he said
unto them, Neither tell I you by what
authority I do these things.</cell><cell>33 And they answered and said
unto Jesus, We cannot tell. And
Jesus answering saith unto them,
Neither do I tell you by what authority
I do these things.</cell></row>
<row><cell>28 But what think ye? A <hi rend='italic'>certain</hi>
man had two sons; and he came to
the first, and said, Son, go work
to-day in my vineyard.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 He answered and said, I will
not; but afterward he repented, and
went.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And he came to the second, and
said likewise. And he answered and
said, I <hi rend='italic'>go</hi>, sir: and went not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 Whether of them twain did the
will of <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> father? They say unto
him, The first. Jesus saith unto
them, Verily I say unto you, That the
publicans and the harlots go into the
kingdom of God before you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 For John came unto you in the
way of righteousness, and ye believed
him not: but the publicans and the
harlots believed him: and ye, when
ye had seen <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, repented not afterward,
that ye might believe him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XX. 1-8.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>And it came to pass, <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> on one of
those days, as he taught the people in
the temple, and preached the gospel,
the chief priests and the scribes came
upon <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, with the elders,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And spake unto him, saying, Tell
us, By what authority doest thou
these things? or who is he that gave
thee this authority?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And he answered and said unto
them, I will also ask you one thing;
and answer me:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 The baptism of John, was it from
heaven, or of men?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And they reasoned with themselves,
saying, If we shall say, From
heaven; he will say, Why then believed
ye him not?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 But and if we say, Of men; all
the people will stone us: for they be
persuaded that John was a prophet.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And they answered, That they
could not tell whence <hi rend='italic'>it was</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And Jesus said unto them, Neither
tell I you by what authority I do
these things.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>

<div>
<head>§ 116. Parable of the wicked husbandmen.
(Third Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXI. 33-46.</cell><cell>CH. XII.</cell></row>
<row><cell>33 Hear another parable; There
was a certain householder, which
planted a vineyard, and hedged it
round about, and digged a wine-press
in it, and built a tower, and let it out
to husbandmen, and went into a far
country:</cell><cell>And he began to speak unto them
by parables. A <hi rend='italic'>certain</hi> man planted
a vineyard, and set an hedge about <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>,
and digged a <hi rend='italic'>place for</hi> the wine-fat,
and built a tower, and let it out to
husbandmen, and went into a far country.</cell></row>
<row><cell>34 And when the time of the fruit
drew near, he sent his servants<note place='foot'>Many servants are sent; some of whom are beaten,
some slain, some stoned. Here St. Matthew is more circumstantial than the other two
Evangelists, who mention only one servant as sent, and one of the three injurious modes
of treatment. Some suppose that this servant was chief among the rest.</note> to the
husbandmen, that they might receive
the fruits of it.</cell><cell>2 And at the season he sent to the
husbandmen a servant,<note place='foot'>Here Mark mentions one servant among the others, as stoned
wounded in the head, and sent away dishonoured; and Luke selects the circumstance
that that one was beaten. Then Mark and Luke mention a third message, about which
Matthew is silent. But, <q>qui pauciora memorat, plura non negat.</q> St. Luke may
be understood as saying that a mortal wound was inflicted on the third messenger.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note> that he might
receive from the husbandmen of the
fruit of the vineyard.</cell></row>
<row><cell>35 And the husbandmen took his
servants, and beat one, and killed
another, and stoned another.</cell><cell>3 And they caught <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, and beat
him, and sent <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> away empty.</cell></row>
<row><cell>36 Again he sent other servants
more than the first: and they did unto
them likewise.</cell><cell>4 And again he sent unto them
another servant: and at him they
cast stones, and wounded <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> in the
head, and sent <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> away shamefully
handled.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5 And again he sent another; and
him they killed, and many others;
beating some, and killing some.</cell></row>
<row><cell>37 But last of all, he sent unto
them his son, saying, They will
reverence my son.</cell><cell>6 Having yet therefore one son, his
well-beloved, he sent him also last
unto them, saying, They will reverence
my son.</cell></row>
<row><cell>38 But when the husbandmen saw
the son, they said among themselves,
This is the heir; come, let us kill
him, and let us seize on his inheritance.</cell><cell>7 But those husbandmen said
among themselves, This is the heir;
come, let us kill him, and the inheritance
shall be ours.</cell></row>
<row><cell>39 And they caught him, and cast
<hi rend='italic'>him</hi> out of the vineyard, and slew <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>.</cell><cell>8 And they took him, and killed
<hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, and cast <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> out of the vineyard.</cell></row>
<row><cell>40 When the lord therefore of the
vineyard cometh, what will he do unto
those husbandmen?</cell><cell>9 What shall therefore the lord of
the vineyard do? He will come and
destroy the husbandmen, and will give
the vineyard unto others.</cell></row>
<row><cell>41 They say unto him, He will
miserably destroy those wicked men,
and will let out <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> vineyard unto
other husbandmen, which shall render
him the fruits in their seasons.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 Jesus saith unto them, Did ye
never read in the scriptures, The
stone which the builders rejected, the
same is become the head of the corner:
this is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous
in our eyes?<note place='foot'>Ps. cxviii. 22.</note></cell><cell>10 And have ye not read this
scripture; The stone which the builders
rejected is become the head of the corner:</cell></row>
<row><cell>43 Therefore say I unto you, The
kingdom of God shall be taken from
you, and given to a nation bringing
forth the fruits thereof.</cell><cell>11 This was the Lord's doing, and
it is marvellous in our eyes?</cell></row>
<row><cell>43 Therefore say I unto you, The
kingdom of God shall be taken from
you, and given to a nation bringing
forth the fruits thereof.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 And whosoever shall fall on this
stone, shall be broken: but on whomsoever
it shall fall, it will grind him
to powder.<note place='foot'>Isa. viii. 14, seq. Zech. xii. 3. Dan. ii. 34, seq., 44, seq.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 And when the chief priests and
Pharisees had heard his parables,
they perceived that he spake of them.</cell><cell>12 And they sought to lay hold on
him, but feared the people; for they
knew that he had spoken the parable
against them: and they left him, and
went their way.</cell></row>
<row><cell>46 But when they sought to lay
hands on him, they feared the multitude,
because they took him for a
prophet.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>
CH. XX. 9-19.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 Then began he to speak to the
people this parable: A certain man
planted a vineyard, and let it forth to
husbandmen, and went into a far
Country for a long time.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And at the season he sent a
servant to the husbandmen, that they
should give him of the fruit of the
vineyard: but the husbandmen beat
him, and sent <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> away empty.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And again he sent another servant:
and they beat him also, and
entreated <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> shamefully, and sent
him away empty.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And again he sent a third: and
they wounded him also, and cast <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>
out.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 Then said the lord of the vineyard,
What shall I do? I will send
my beloved son: it may be they will
reverence <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> when they see him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 But when the husbandmen saw
him, they reasoned among themselves,
saying, This is the heir: come, let us
kill him, that the inheritance may be
ours.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 So they cast him out of the
vineyard, and killed <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>. What
therefore shall the lord of the vineyard
do unto them?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 He shall come and destroy these
husbandmen, and shall give the vineyard
to others. And when they heard
it, they said, God forbid.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And he beheld them, and said,
What is this then that is written,
The stone which the builders rejected,
the same is become the head of the
corner?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 Whosoever shall fall upon that
stone, shall be broken: but on whomsoever
it shall fall, it will grind him
to powder.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And the chief priests and the
scribes the same hour sought to lay
hands on him; and they feared the
people: for they perceived that he had
spoken this parable against them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>

<div>
<head>§ 117. Parable of the marriage of the King's Son.
(Third Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXII. 1-14.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>And Jesus answered and spake unto
them again by parables, and said,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 The kingdom of heaven is like
unto a certain king, which made a
marriage for his son,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And sent forth his servants to
call them that were bidden to the wedding:
and they would not come.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 Again he sent forth other servants,
saying, Tell them which are
bidden, Behold, I have prepared my
dinner: my oxen and <hi rend='italic'>my</hi> fatlings <hi rend='italic'>are</hi>
killed, and all things <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> ready: come
unto the marriage.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 But they made light of <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, and
went their ways, one to his farm,
another to his merchandise.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And the remnant took his servants,
and entreated <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> spitefully,
and slew <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 But when the king heard <hi rend='italic'>thereof</hi>,
he was wroth: and he sent forth his
armies, and destroyed those murderers,
and burned up their city.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 Then saith he to his servants,
The wedding is ready, but they which
were bidden were not worthy.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 Go ye therefore into the highways,
and as many as ye shall find,
bid to the marriage.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 So those servants went out into
the highways, and gathered together
all as many as they found, both bad
and good: and the wedding was furnished
with guests.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And when the king came in to
see the guests, he saw there a man
which had not on a wedding-garment:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And he saith unto him, Friend,
how camest thou in hither, not having
a wedding-garment? And he was
speechless.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 Then said the king to the servants,
Bind him hand and foot, and
take him away, and cast <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> into
outer darkness: there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth.<note place='foot'><p>In the East, where the fashions of dress rarely if ever
change, much of their riches consists in the number and splendour of their robes, or
<foreign rend='italic'>caffetans</foreign>. Presents of garments are frequently alluded to in Scripture. Gen. xlv. 22.
2 Chron. ix. 24. Judges xiv. 12. 2 Kings v. 5. Ezra ii. 69. Neh. vii. 70, where <q>the
Tirshatha gave five hundred and thirty priests' garments.</q>
</p>
<p>
Presents were considered as tokens of honour;&mdash;not meant as offers of payment or
enrichment, (1 Sam. ix. 7); and especially presents of dresses. 1 Sam. xviii. 4. Luke
xv. 22. <hi rend='italic'>Tavernier</hi>, p. 43, mentions a <foreign rend='italic'>nazar</foreign>, whose virtue so pleased a king of Persia,
that he caused himself to be disappareled, and gave his own habit to the <foreign rend='italic'>nazar</foreign>, which is
<hi rend='italic'>the greatest honour a king of Persia can bestow on a subject</hi>.
</p>
<p>
Such presents are given by kings on great occasions, especially at the marriages of their
children. The Sultan Achmet, at the marriage of his eldest daughter, <q>gave presents to
above 20,000 persons.</q> Knolles's Hist. of the Turks, p. 1311. So Ahasuerus <q>gave
gifts, <hi rend='italic'>according to the state of the king</hi>.</q> Esth. ii. 18.
</p>
<p>
The king gives his garment of honour <emph>before</emph> the wearer is admitted into his presence;&mdash;De
la Mottraye's Trav. p. 199; (Does this illustrate Zech. iii. 3, 4?)&mdash;and would resent
it if any, having received robes of him, should appear in his presence without wearing these
marks of his liberality. And to refuse such favours, when offered, is considered as one of
the greatest indignities. Sir John Chardin relates an instance where such a refusal cost a
vizier his life. See 4 <hi rend='smallcaps'>Calm. Dict.</hi> pp. 64, 126, 514.
</p></note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 For many are called, but few
<hi rend='italic'>are</hi> chosen.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>

<div>
<head>§ 118. Insidious question of the Pharisees. Tribute
to Cesar. (Third Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXII. 15-22.</cell><cell>CH. XII. 13-17.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15 Then went the Pharisees, and
took counsel how they might entangle
him in <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> talk.</cell><cell>13 And they send unto him certain
of the Pharisees, and of the Herodians,
to catch him in <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> words.</cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And they sent out unto him
their disciples, with the Herodians,
saying, Master, we know that thou
art true, and teachest the way of God
in truth, neither carest thou for any
<hi rend='italic'>man</hi>: for thou regardest not the person
of men.</cell><cell>14 And when they were come, they
say unto him, Master, we know that
thou art true, and carest for no man:
for thou regardest not the person of
men, but teachest the way of God in
truth: Is it lawful to give tribute to
Cesar, or not?</cell></row>
<row><cell>17 Tell us therefore, What thinkest
thou? Is it lawful to give tribute
unto Cesar, or not?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 But Jesus perceived their wickedness,
and said, Why tempt ye me,
<hi rend='italic'>ye</hi> hypocrites?</cell><cell>15 Shall we give, or shall we not
give? But he, knowing their hypocrisy,
said unto them, Why tempt ye
me? bring me a penny, that I may
see <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 Shew me the tribute-money.
And they brought unto him a penny.</cell><cell>16 And they brought <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>. And he
saith unto them, Whose <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> this image
and superscription? And they said
unto him, Cesar's.</cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And he saith unto them, Whose
<hi rend='italic'>is</hi> this image, and superscription?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 They say unto him, Cesar's.
Then saith he unto them, Render
therefore unto Cesar, the things which
are Cesar's; and unto God, the things
that are God's.</cell><cell>17 And Jesus answering, said unto
them, Render to Cesar the things that
are Cesar's, and to God the things
that are God's. And they marvelled at him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>22 When they had heard <hi rend='italic'>these
words</hi>, they marvelled, and left him,
and went their way.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XX. 20-26.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And they watched <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, and sent
forth spies, which should feign themselves
just men, that they might take
hold of his words, that so they might
deliver him unto the power and authority
of the governor.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And they asked him, saying,
Master, we know that thou sayest
and teachest rightly, neither acceptest
thou the person of <hi rend='italic'>any</hi>, but teachest
the way of God truly:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 Is it lawful for us to give tribute
unto Cesar, or no?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 But he perceived their craftiness,
and said unto them, Why tempt
ye me?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 Shew me a penny. Whose
image and superscription hath it?
They answered and said, Cesar's.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And he said unto them, Render
therefore unto Cesar the things which
be Cesar's, and unto God the things
which be God's.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And they could not take hold of
his words before the people: and they
marvelled at his answer, and held
their peace.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>

<div>
<head>§ 119. Insidious question of the Sadducees. The
Resurrection. (Third Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXII. 23-33.</cell><cell>CH. XII. 18-27.</cell></row>
<row><cell>23 The same day came to him the
Sadducees, which say that there is no
resurrection, and asked him,</cell><cell>18 Then come unto him the Sadducees,
which say there is no resurrection;
and they asked him, saying,</cell></row>
<row><cell>24 Saying, Master, Moses said, If
a man die, having no children, his
brother shall marry his wife, and raise
up seed unto his brother.<note place='foot'>Deut. xxv. 5.</note></cell><cell>19 Master, Moses wrote unto us,
If a man's brother die, and leave <hi rend='italic'>his</hi>
wife <hi rend='italic'>behind him</hi>, and leave no children,
that his brother should take his
wife, and raise up seed unto his brother.</cell></row>
<row><cell>25 Now, there were with us seven
brethren: and the first, when he had
married a wife, deceased: and having
no issue, left his wife unto his brother.</cell><cell>20 Now, there were seven brethren:
and the first took a wife, and dying
left no seed.</cell></row>
<row><cell>26 Likewise the second also, and
the third, unto the seventh.</cell><cell>21 And the second took her, and
died, neither left he any seed: and
the third likewise.</cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And last of all the woman died
also.</cell><cell>22 And the seven had her, and left
no seed: last of all the woman died also.</cell></row>
<row><cell>28 Therefore, in the resurrection,
whose wife shall she be of the seven?
for they all had her.</cell><cell>23 In the resurrection therefore,
when they shall rise, whose wife
shall she be of them? for the seven
had her to wife.</cell></row>
<row><cell>29 Jesus answered and said unto
them, Ye do err, not knowing the
scriptures, nor the power of God.</cell><cell>24 And Jesus answering, said unto
them, Do ye not therefore err, because
ye know not the scriptures,
neither the power of God?</cell></row>
<row><cell>30 For in the resurrection they
neither marry, nor are given in marriage,
but are as the angels of God in
heaven.</cell><cell>25 For when they shall rise from
the dead, they neither marry, nor are
given in marriage; but are as the
angels which are in heaven.</cell></row>
<row><cell>31 But, as touching the resurrection
of the dead, have ye not read that
which was spoken unto you by God,
saying,</cell><cell>26 And as touching the dead, that
they rise; have ye not read in the
book of Moses, how in the bush God
spake unto him, saying, I <hi rend='italic'>am</hi> the God
of Abraham, and the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob?</cell></row>
<row><cell>32 I am the God of Abraham, and
the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob?<note place='foot'>Ex. iii. 6.</note> God is not the God of the
dead, but of the living.</cell><cell>27 He is not the God of the dead,
but the God of the living: ye therefore
do greatly err.</cell></row>
<row><cell>33 And when the multitude heard
<hi rend='italic'>this</hi>, they were astonished at his doctrine.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XX. 27-40.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 Then came to <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> certain of
the Sadducees (which deny that there
is any resurrection) and they asked
him,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 Saying, Master, Moses wrote
unto us, If any man's brother die,
having a wife, and he die without
children, that his brother should take
his wife, and raise up seed unto his
brother.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 There were therefore seven
brethren: and the first took a wife,
and died without children.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And the second took her to
wife, and he died childless.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 And the third took her; and in
like manner the seven also: and they
left no children, and died.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 Last of all the woman died also.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 Therefore in the resurrection,
whose wife of them is she? for seven
had her to wife.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 And Jesus answering, said unto
them, The children of this world marry,
and are given in marriage:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 But they which shall be accounted
worthy to obtain that world,
and the resurrection from the dead,
neither marry, nor are given in marriage:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 Neither can they die any more:<note place='foot'>Here is a minute indication of St.
Luke's veracity, derived from his medical profession. No other Evangelist records
this remark; but it would not be likely to escape the notice of a physician. See on
Luke xxii. 44.</note>
for they are equal unto the angels;
and are the children of God, being the
children of the resurrection.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 Now that the dead are raised,
even Moses shewed at the bush, when
he calleth the Lord the God of Abraham,
and the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 For he is not a God of the dead,
but of the living: for all live unto him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 Then certain of the scribes answering,
said, Master, thou hast well
said.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 And after that, they durst not
ask him any <hi rend='italic'>question at all</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>

<div>
<head>§ 120. A lawyer questions Jesus. The two great
Commandments. (Third Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXII. 34-40.</cell><cell>CH. XII. 28-34.</cell></row>
<row><cell>34 But when the Pharisees had
heard that he had put the Sadducees
to silence, they were gathered together.</cell><cell>28 And one of the scribes came,
and having heard them reasoning together, and perceiving that he had answered them
well, asked him, Which is the first commandment of all?</cell></row>
<row><cell>35 Then one of them <hi rend='italic'>which was</hi> a
lawyer, asked <hi rend='italic'>him a question</hi>, tempting
him, and saying,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 Master, which <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> the great commandment
in the law?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>29 And Jesus answered him, The
first of all the commandments <hi rend='italic'>is</hi>,
Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God is
one Lord:</cell></row>
<row><cell>37 Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt
love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind.<note place='foot'>Deut. vi. 4, 5.</note></cell><cell>30 And thou shalt love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy mind,
and with all thy strength: this <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> the
first commandment.</cell></row>
<row><cell>38 This is the first and great commandment.</cell><cell>31 And the second <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> like, <hi rend='italic'>namely</hi>
this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour
as thyself: there is none other commandment
greater than these.</cell></row>
<row><cell>39 And the second <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> like unto it,
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.<note place='foot'>Lev. xix. 18.</note></cell><cell>32 And the scribe said unto him,
Well Master, thou hast said the
truth: for there is one God; and
there is none other but he:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>33 And to love him with all the
heart, and with all the understanding,
and with all the soul, and with all the
strength, and to love <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> neighbour as
himself, is more than all whole burnt-offerings
and sacrifices.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>34 And when Jesus saw that he
answered discreetly, he said unto him,
Thou art not far from the kingdom of
God. And no man after that durst
ask him <hi rend='italic'>any question</hi>.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>

<div>
<head>§ 121. How is Christ the Son of David?
(Third Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXII. 41-46.</cell><cell>CH. XII. 35-37.</cell></row>
<row><cell>41 While the Pharisees were gathered
together, Jesus asked them,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 Saying, What think ye of Christ?
whose son is he? They say unto him,
<hi rend='italic'>The son</hi> of David.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 He saith unto them, How then
doth David in spirit call him Lord,
saying,</cell><cell>35 And Jesus answered and said,
while he taught in the temple, How
say the scribes that Christ is the son
of David?</cell></row>
<row><cell>44 The <hi rend='smallcaps'>Lord</hi> said unto my Lord,
Sit thou on my right hand, till I make
thine enemies thy footstool?<note place='foot'>Ps. cx. 1.</note></cell><cell>Holy Ghost, The <hi rend='smallcaps'>Lord</hi> said unto my
Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I
make thine enemies thy footstool.</cell></row>
<row><cell>45 If David then call him Lord,
how is he his son?</cell><cell>37 David therefore himself calleth
him Lord, and whence is he <hi rend='italic'>then</hi> his
son? And the common people heard
him gladly.</cell></row>
<row><cell>46 And no man was able to answer
him a word, neither durst any <hi rend='italic'>man</hi>,
from that day forth, ask him any more
<hi rend='italic'>questions</hi>.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XX. 41-44.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 And he said unto them, How
say they that Christ is David's son?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 And David himself saith in the
book of Psalms, The <hi rend='smallcaps'>Lord</hi> said unto
my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 Till I make thine enemies thy
footstool.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 David therefore calleth him
Lord, how <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> he then his son?</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 122. Warnings against the evil example of the Scribes
and Pharisees. (Third Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXIII. 1-12.</cell><cell>CH. XII. 38, 39.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Then spake Jesus to the multitude,
and to his disciples,</cell><cell>38 And he said unto them in his
doctrine, Beware of the scribes, which
love to go in long clothing, and <hi rend='italic'>love</hi>
salutations in the market-places,</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 Saying, The scribes and the
Pharisees sit in Moses' seat:</cell><cell>39 And the chief seats in the synagogues,
and the uppermost rooms at feasts:</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 All therefore whatsoever they
bid you observe, <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> observe and do:
but do not ye after their works: for
they say, and do not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 For they bind heavy burdens,
and grievous to be borne, and lay
<hi rend='italic'>them</hi> on men's shoulders; but they
<hi rend='italic'>themselves</hi> will not move them with
one of their fingers.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 But all their works they do for to
be seen of men: they make broad their
phylacteries, and enlarge the borders
of their garments,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And love the uppermost rooms
at feasts, and the chief seats in the
synagogues,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And greetings in the markets,
and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 But be ye not called Rabbi: for
one is your Master, <hi rend='italic'>even</hi> Christ; and
all ye are brethren.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And call no <hi rend='italic'>man</hi> your father upon
the earth: for one is your Father
which is in heaven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 Neither be ye called masters:
for one is your master, <hi rend='italic'>even</hi> Christ.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 But he that is greatest among
you, shall be your servant.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And whosoever shall exalt himself,
shall be abased; and he that
shall humble himself, shall be exalted.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XX. 45, 46.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 Then in the audience of all the
people, he said unto his disciples,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46 Beware of the scribes, which
desire to walk in long robes, and love
greetings in the markets, and the
highest seats in the synagogues, and
the chief rooms at feasts;</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>

<div>
<head>§ 123. Woes against the Scribes and Pharisees. Lamentation
over Jerusalem. (Third Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXIII. 13-39.</cell><cell>CH. XII. 40.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13 But wo unto you, scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut up
the kingdom of heaven against men:
for ye neither go in <hi rend='italic'>yourselves</hi>, neither
suffer ye them that are entering, to
go in.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 Wo unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye devour
widows' houses, and for a pretence
make long prayer: therefore ye shall
receive the greater damnation.</cell><cell>40 Which devour widows' houses
and for a pretence make long prayers
these shall receive greater damnation</cell></row>
<row><cell>15 Wo unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye compass
sea and land to make one proselyte;
and when he is made, ye make him
two-fold more the child of hell than
yourselves.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 Wo unto you, <hi rend='italic'>ye</hi> blind guides,
which say, Whosoever shall swear by
the temple, it is nothing; but whosoever
shall swear by the gold of the
temple, he is a debtor.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 <hi rend='italic'>Ye</hi> fools, and blind! for whether
is greater, the gold, or the temple that
sanctifieth the gold?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 And whosoever shall swear by
the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever
sweareth by the gift that is upon
it, he is guilty.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 <hi rend='italic'>Ye</hi> fools, and blind! for whether
<hi rend='italic'>is</hi> greater, the gift, or the altar that
sanctifieth the gift?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 Whoso therefore shall swear by
the altar, sweareth by it, and by all
things thereon.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And whoso shall swear by the
temple, sweareth by it, and by him
that dwelleth therein.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And he that shall swear by
heaven, sweareth by the throne of
God, and by him that sitteth thereon.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 Wo unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye pay tithe
of mint, and anise, and cummin, and
have omitted the weightier <hi rend='italic'>matters</hi> of
the law, judgment, mercy, and faith:
these ought ye to have done, and not
to leave the other undone.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 <hi rend='italic'>Ye</hi> blind guides, which strain at
a gnat, and swallow a camel.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 Wo unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye make clean
the outside of the cup and of the platter,
but within they are full of extortion
and excess.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 <hi rend='italic'>Thou</hi> blind Pharisee, cleanse
first that which <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> within the cup and
platter, that the outside of them may
be clean also.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 Wo unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye are like
unto whited sepulchres, which indeed
appear beautiful outward, but are
within full of dead <hi rend='italic'>men's</hi> bones, and
of all uncleanness.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 Even so ye also outwardly appear
righteous unto men, but within
ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 Wo unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! because ye build
the tombs of the prophets, and garnish
the sepulchres of the righteous,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And say, If we had been in the
days of our fathers, we would not
have been partakers with them in the
blood of the prophets.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 Wherefore ye be witnesses unto
yourselves, that ye are the children of
them which killed the prophets.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 Fill ye up then the measure of
your fathers.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 <hi rend='italic'>Ye</hi> serpents, <hi rend='italic'>ye</hi> generation of
vipers, how can ye escape the damnation
of hell?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 Wherefore, behold, I send unto
you prophets, and wise men, and
scribes; and <hi rend='italic'>some</hi> of them ye shall kill
and crucify, and <hi rend='italic'>some</hi> of them shall ye
scourge in your synagogue, and persecute
<hi rend='italic'>them</hi> from city to city:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 That upon you may come all the
righteous blood shed upon the earth,
from the blood of righteous Abel, unto
the blood of Zacharias, son of Barachias,
whom ye slew between the
temple and the altar.<note place='foot'>Gen. iv. 8. 2 Chron. xxiv. 20-22.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 Verily, I say unto you, All
these things shall come upon this
generation.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, <hi rend='italic'>thou</hi>
that killest the prophets, and stonest
them which are sent unto thee, how
often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as a hen
gathereth her chickens under <hi rend='italic'>her</hi>
wings, and ye would not!</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 Behold, your house is left unto
you desolate.<note place='foot'>Ps. lxix. 26. Jer. xii. 7, and xxii. 5.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 For I say unto you, Ye shall
not see me henceforth, till ye shall
say, Blessed <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> he that cometh in the
name of the Lord.<note place='foot'>Ps. cxviii. 26.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XX. 47.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Which devour widows' houses,
and for a shew make long prayers:
the same shall receive greater damnation.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>

<div>
<head>§ 124. The Widow's Mite. (Third Day Of
The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Mark.</cell><cell>Luke.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XII. 41-44.</cell><cell>CH. XXI. 1-4.</cell></row>
<row><cell>41 And Jesus sat over against the
treasury, and beheld how the people
cast money into the treasury: and
many that were rich cast in much.</cell><cell>And he looked up and saw the rich
men casting their gifts into the treasury.</cell></row>
<row><cell>42 And there came a certain poor
widow, and she threw in two mites,
which make a farthing.</cell><cell>2 And he saw also a certain poor
widow, casting in thither two mites.</cell></row>
<row><cell>43 And he called <hi rend='italic'>unto him</hi> his disciples,
and saith unto them, Verily, I
say unto you, That this poor widow
hath cast more in, than all they which
have cast into the treasury.</cell><cell>3 And he said, Of a truth I say
unto you, That this poor widow hath
cast in more than they all.</cell></row>
<row><cell>44 For all <hi rend='italic'>they</hi> did cast in of their
abundance: but she of her want did
cast in all that she had, <hi rend='italic'>even</hi> all her
living.</cell><cell>4 For all these have of their abundance
cast in unto the offerings of
God: but she of her penury hath cast
in all the living that she had.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>

<div>
<head>§ 125. Certain Greeks desire to see Jesus.
(Third Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XII. 20-36.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And there were certain Greeks
among them, that came up to worship
at the <hi rend='italic'>feast</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 The same came therefore to
Philip, which was of Bethsaida of
Galilee, and desired him, saying, Sir,
we would see Jesus.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 Philip cometh and telleth Andrew:
and again, Andrew and Philip
tell Jesus.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And Jesus answered them, saying,
The hour is come, that the Son of
man should be glorified.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 Verily, verily, I say unto you,
Except a corn of wheat fall into the
ground and die, it abideth alone: but
if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 He that loveth his life shall
lose it; and he that hateth his life
in this world, shall keep it unto life
eternal.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 If any man serve me, let him
follow me, and where I am, there
shall also my servant be: if any man
serve me, him will <hi rend='italic'>my</hi> Father honour.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 Now is my soul troubled; and
what shall I say? Father, save me
from this hour: but for this cause
came I unto this hour.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 Father, glorify thy name. Then
came there a voice from heaven, <hi rend='italic'>saying</hi>,
I have both glorified <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, and will
glorify <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> again.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 The people therefore that stood
by, and heard <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, said that it thundered.
Others said, An angel spake
to him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 Jesus answered and said, This
voice came not because of me, but for
your sakes.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 Now is the judgment of this
world: now shall the prince of this
world be cast out.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 And I, if I be lifted up from the
earth, will draw all <hi rend='italic'>men</hi> unto me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 (This he said, signifying what
death he should die.)</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 The people answered him, We
have heard out of the law that Christ
abideth for ever:<note place='foot'>2 Sam. vii. 13. Ps. lxxxix. 30, 37; cx. 4.</note> and how sayest
thou, The Son of man must be lifted
up? Who is this Son of man?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 Then Jesus said unto them, Yet
a little while is the light with you.
Walk while ye have the light, lest
darkness come upon you: for he that
walketh in darkness knoweth not
whither he goeth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 While ye have light, believe in
the light, that ye may be the children
of light. These things spake Jesus,
and departed, and did hide himself
from them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>

<div>
<head>§ 126. Reflections upon the unbelief of the Jews.
(Third Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XII. 37-50.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 But though he had done so
many miracles before them, yet they
believed not on him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 That the saying of Esaias the
prophet might be fulfilled, which he
spake, Lord, who hath believed our
report? and to whom hath the arm of
the Lord been revealed?<note place='foot'>Is. liii. 1.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 Therefore they could not believe,
because that Esaias said again,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 He hath blinded their eyes, and
hardened their heart; that they should
not see with <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> eyes, nor understand
with <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> heart, and be converted,
and I should heal them.<note place='foot'>Is. vi. 10.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 These things said Esaias, when
he saw his glory, and spake of him.<note place='foot'>Is. vi. 1, seq.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 Nevertheless, among the chief
rulers also many believed on him; but
because of the Pharisees they did not
confess <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, lest they should be put
out of the synagogue:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 For they loved the praise of
men more than the praise of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 Jesus cried, and said, He that
believeth on me, believeth not on me,
but on him that sent me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 And he that seeth me, seeth him
that sent me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46 I am come a light into the
world, that whosoever believeth on
me should not abide in darkness.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>47 And if any man hear my words,
and believe not, I judge him not: for
I came not to judge the world, but to
save the world.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>48 He that rejecteth me, and receiveth
not my words, hath one that
judgeth him: the word that I have
spoken, the same shall judge him in
the last day.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>49 For I have not spoken of myself;
but the Father which sent me,
he gave me a commandment, what I
should say, and what I should speak.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>50 And I know that his commandment
is life everlasting: whatsoever
I speak therefore, even as the Father
said unto me, so I speak.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>

<div>
<head>§ 127. Jesus, on taking leave of the Temple, foretells its destruction, etc.
(Third Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem. Mount of Olives</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXIV. 1-14.</cell><cell>CH. XIII. 1-13.</cell></row>
<row><cell>And Jesus went out, and departed
from the temple: and his disciples
came to <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> for to shew him the
buildings of the temple.</cell><cell>And as he went out of the temple,
one of his disciples saith unto him,
Master, see what manner of <hi rend='italic'>stones</hi>,
and what buildings <hi rend='italic'>are here</hi>!</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And Jesus said unto them, See
ye not all these things? verily, I say
unto you, There shall not be left here
one stone upon another, that shall not
be thrown down.</cell><cell>2 And Jesus answering, said unto
him, Seest thou these great buildings?
there shall not be left one stone upon
another, that shall not be thrown down.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And as he sat upon the mount of
Olives, the disciples came unto him
privately, saying, Tell us, when shall
these things be? and what <hi rend='italic'>shall</hi> be
the sign of thy coming, and of the
end of the world.</cell><cell>3 And as he sat upon the mount of
Olives, over against the temple, Peter,
and James, and John, and Andrew,
asked him privately,</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>4 Tell us, when shall these things
be? and what <hi rend='italic'>shall</hi> be the sign when
all these things shall be fulfilled?</cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And Jesus answered and said
unto them, Take heed that no man
deceive you.</cell><cell>5 And Jesus answering them, began
to say. Take heed lest any <hi rend='italic'>man</hi>
deceive you:</cell></row>
<row><cell>5 For many shall come in my
name, saying, I am Christ; and shall
deceive many.</cell><cell>6 For many shall come in my
name, saying, I am <hi rend='italic'>Christ</hi>; and shall
deceive many.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And ye shall hear of wars, and
rumours of wars: see that ye be not
troubled: for all <hi rend='italic'>these things</hi> must
come to pass, but the end is not yet.</cell><cell>7 And when ye shall hear of wars,
and rumours of wars, be ye not
troubled: for <hi rend='italic'>such things</hi> must needs
be; but the end <hi rend='italic'>shall</hi> not be yet.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7 For nation shall rise against nation,
and kingdom against kingdom:
and there shall be famines, and pestilence,
and earthquakes in divers
places.</cell><cell>8 For nation shall rise against nation,
and kingdom against kingdom:
and there shall be earthquakes in
<hi rend='italic'>divers</hi> places, and there shall be
famines, and troubles: <hi rend='italic'>these are</hi> the
beginnings of sorrows.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8 All these <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> the beginning of
sorrows.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 Then shall they deliver you up
to be afflicted, and shall kill you:
and ye shall be hated of all nations
for my name's sake.</cell><cell>9 But take heed to yourselves: for
they shall deliver you up to councils;
and in the synagogues ye shall be
beaten: and ye shall be brought before
rulers and kings for my sake, for a
testimony against them.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>10 And the gospel must first be
published among all nations.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>11 But when they shall lead <hi rend='italic'>you</hi>,
and deliver you up, take no thought
beforehand what ye shall speak, neither
do ye premeditate: but whatsoever
shall be given you in that hour,
that speak ye: for it is not ye that
speak, but the Holy Ghost.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And then shall many be offended,
and shall betray one another, and
shall hate one another.</cell><cell>12 Now, the brother shall betray
the brother to death, and the father
the son: and children shall rise up
against <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> parents, and shall cause
them to be put to death.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And many false prophets shall
rise, and shall deceive many.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And because iniquity shall
abound, the love of many shall wax
cold.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 But he that shall endure unto
the end, the same shall be saved.</cell><cell>13 And ye shall be hated of all
<hi rend='italic'>men</hi> for my name's sake: but he that
shall endure unto the end, the same
shall be saved.</cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And this gospel of the kingdom
shall be preached in all the world, for
a witness unto all nations; and then
shall the end come.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXI. 5-19.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And as some spake of the temple,
how it was adorned with goodly
stones, and gifts, he said,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 <hi rend='italic'>As for</hi> these things which ye
behold, the days will come, in the
which there shall not be left one stone
upon another, that shall not be thrown
down.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And they asked him, saying,
Master, but when shall these things
be? and what sign <hi rend='italic'>will there be</hi> when
these things shall come to pass?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And he said, Take heed that ye
be not deceived: for many shall come
in my name, saying, I am <hi rend='italic'>Christ</hi>;
and the time draweth near: go ye not
therefore after them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 But when ye shall hear of wars,
and commotions, be not terrified: for
these things must first come to pass;
but the end <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> not by and by.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 Then said he unto them, Nation
shall rise against nation, and kingdom
against kingdom:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And great earthquakes shall be
in divers places, and famines, and
pestilences: and fearful sights, and
great signs shall there be from heaven.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 But before all these they shall
lay their hands on you, and persecute
<hi rend='italic'>you</hi>, delivering <hi rend='italic'>you</hi> up to the synagogues,
and into prisons, being brought
before kings and rulers for my name's
sake.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And it shall turn to you for a
testimony.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 Settle <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> therefore in your hearts,
not to meditate before what ye shall
answer.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 For I will give you a mouth and
wisdom, which all your adversaries
shall not be able to gainsay nor resist.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And ye shall be betrayed both
by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolks,
and friends; and <hi rend='italic'>some</hi> of you
shall they cause to be put to death.<note place='foot'>No imposter would have warned his followers, as Jesus
did, of the persecutions they would have to submit to.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And ye shall be hated of all <hi rend='italic'>men</hi>
for my name's sake.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 But there shall not an hair of
your head perish.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 In your patience possess ye your
souls.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>

<div>
<head>§ 128. The signs of Christ's coming to destroy Jerusalem, etc.
(Third Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Mount of Olives</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXIV. 15-42.</cell><cell>CH. XXIII. 14-37.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15 When ye, therefore, shall see the
abomination of desolation, spoken of
by Daniel the prophet,<note place='foot'>Danl. ix. 27.</note> stand in the
holy place, (whoso readeth, let him
understand,)</cell><cell>14 But when ye shall see the
abomination of desolation, spoken of
by Daniel the prophet, standing where
it ought not, (let him that readeth
understand) then let them that be in
Judea flee to the mountains:</cell></row>
<row><cell>16 Then let them which be in Judea
flee into the mountains:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 Let him which is on the housetop
not come down to take any thing
out of his house:</cell><cell>15 And let him that is on the housetop
not go down into the house, neither
enter <hi rend='italic'>therein</hi>, to take any thing
out of his house:</cell></row>
<row><cell>18 Neither let him which is in the
field return back to take his clothes.</cell><cell>16 And let him that is in the field
not turn back again for to take up his garment.</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And wo unto them that are with
child, and to them that give suck in
those days!</cell><cell>17 But wo to them that are with
child, and to them that give suck in
those days!</cell></row>
<row><cell>20 But pray ye that your flight be
not in the winter, neither on the
sabbath-day:</cell><cell>18 And pray ye that your flight be
not in the winter.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21 For then shall be great tribulation,
such as was not since the beginning
of the world to this time, no, nor
ever shall be.</cell><cell>19 For <hi rend='italic'>in</hi> those days shall be affliction,
such as was not from the beginning
of the creation which God created
unto this time, neither shall be.</cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And except those days should
be shortened, there should no flesh be
saved: but for the elect's sake those
days shall be shortened.</cell><cell>20 And except that the Lord had
shortened these days, no flesh should
be saved: but for the elect's sake,
whom he hath chosen, he hath shortened the days.</cell></row>
<row><cell>23 Then if any man shall say unto
you, Lo, here <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> Christ, or there;
believe <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> not.</cell><cell>21 And then, if any man shall say
to you, Lo, here <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> Christ; or lo, <hi rend='italic'>he is</hi>
there; believe <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> not.</cell></row>
<row><cell>24 For there shall arise false
Christs, and false prophets, and shall
shew great signs and wonders; insomuch
that, if <hi rend='italic'>it were</hi> possible, they
shall deceive the very elect.</cell><cell>22 For false Christs, and false
prophets shall rise, and shall shew
signs and wonders, to seduce, if <hi rend='italic'>it
were</hi> possible, even the elect.</cell></row>
<row><cell>25 Behold, I have told you before.</cell><cell>23 But take ye heed: behold, I
have foretold you all things.</cell></row>
<row><cell>26 Wherefore, if they shall say
unto you, Behold, he is in the desert;
go not forth: behold, he <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> in the
secret chambers; believe <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>
27 For as the lightning cometh out
of the east, and shineth even unto the
west; so shall also the coming of the
Son of man be.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 For wheresoever the carcass
is, there will the eagles be gathered
together.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 Immediately after the tribulation
of those days, shall the sun be darkened,
and the moon shall not give her
light, and the stars shall fall from
heaven, and the powers of the heavens
shall be shaken:<note place='foot'>Is. xiii. 9, 10.  Joel iii. 15.</note></cell><cell>24 But in those days, after that
tribulation, the sun shall be darkened,
and the moon shall not give her light,</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>25 And the stars of heaven shall
fall, and the powers that are in heaven
shall be shaken.</cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And then shall appear the sign
of the Son of man in heaven: and
then shall all the tribes of the earth
mourn, and they shall see the Son of
man coming in the clouds of heaven
with power and great glory.</cell><cell>26 And then shall they see the
Son of man coming in the clouds with
great power and glory.</cell></row>
<row><cell>31 And he shall send his angels
with a great sound of a trumpet, and
they shall gather together his elect
from the four winds, from one end of
heaven to the other.</cell><cell>27 And then shall he send his
angels, and shall gather together his
elect from the four winds, from the
uttermost part of the earth to the
uttermost part of heaven.</cell></row>
<row><cell>32 Now learn a parable of the fig-tree;
When his branch is yet tender,
and putteth forth leaves, ye know that
summer <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> nigh:</cell><cell>28 Now learn a parable of the fig-tree:
When her branch is yet tender,
and putteth forth leaves, ye know that
summer is near:</cell></row>
<row><cell>33 So likewise ye, when ye shall
see all these things, know that it is
near, <hi rend='italic'>even</hi> at the doors.</cell><cell>29 So ye in like manner, when ye
shall see these things come to pass,
know that it is nigh, <hi rend='italic'>even</hi> at the doors.</cell></row>
<row><cell>34 Verily, I say unto you, This
generation shall not pass, till all these
things be fulfilled.</cell><cell>30 Verily, I say unto you, That
this generation shall not pass, till all
these things be done.</cell></row>
<row><cell>35 Heaven and earth shall pass
away, but my words shall not pass
away.</cell><cell>31 Heaven and earth shall pass
away: but my words shall not pass away.</cell></row>
<row><cell>36 But of that day and hour knoweth
no <hi rend='italic'>man</hi>, no, not the angels of
heaven, but my Father only.</cell><cell>32 But of that day and <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> hour
knoweth no man, no, not the angels
which are in heaven, neither the Son,
but the Father.</cell></row>
<row><cell>37 But as the days of Noe <hi rend='italic'>were</hi>,
so shall also the coming of the Son of
man be.</cell><cell>33 Take ye heed, watch and pray:
for ye know not when the time is.</cell></row>
<row><cell>38 For as in the days that were
before the flood, they were eating
and drinking, marrying and giving in
marriage, until the day that Noe
entered into the ark,<note place='foot'>Gen. vii. 4, seq.</note></cell><cell>34 <hi rend='italic'>For the Son of man is</hi> as a man
taking a far journey, who left his
house, and gave authority to his servants,
and to every man his work; and
commanded the porter to watch.</cell></row>
<row><cell>39 And knew not until the flood
came, and took them all away: so
shall also the coming of the Son of
man be.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 Then shall two be in the field;
the one shall be taken, and the other
left.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 Two <hi rend='italic'>women shall be</hi> grinding at
the mill; the one shall be taken, and
the other left.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 Watch therefore; for ye know
not what hour your Lord doth come.</cell><cell>35 Watch ye therefore: for ye
know not when the master of the
house cometh, at even, or at midnight,
or at the cock-crowing, or in the
morning:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>36 Lest coming suddenly, he find
you sleeping.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>37 And what I say unto you, I say
unto all, Watch.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXI. 20-36.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And when ye shall see Jerusalem
compassed with armies, then know
that the desolation thereof is nigh.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 Then let them which are in
Judea flee to the mountains; and let
them which are in the midst of it depart
out; and let not them that are in
the countries enter thereinto.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 For these be the days of vengeance,
that all things which are
written may be fulfilled.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 But wo unto them that are with
child, and to them that give suck in
those days! for there shall be great
distress in the land, and wrath upon
this people.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 And they shall fall by the edge
of the sword, and shall be led away
captive into all nations: and Jerusalem
shall be trodden down of the Gentiles,
until the times of the Gentiles
be fulfilled.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And there shall be signs in the
sun, and in the moon, and in the stars;
and upon the earth distress of nations,
with perplexity; the sea and the
waves roaring;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 Men's hearts failing them for
fear, and for looking after those things
which are coming on the earth: for
the powers of heaven shall be shaken.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And he spake to them a parable;
Behold the fig-tree, and all the
trees;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 When they now shoot forth, ye
see and know of your ownselves that
summer is now nigh at hand.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 So likewise ye, when ye see
these things come to pass, know ye
that the kingdom of God is nigh at
hand.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 Verily, I say unto you, This
generation shall not pass away, till all
be fulfilled.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 Heaven and earth shall pass
away: but my words shall not pass
away.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 And take heed to yourselves,
lest at any time your hearts be overcharged
with surfeiting and drunkenness,
and cares of this life, and <hi rend='italic'>so</hi> that
day come upon you unawares.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 For as a snare shall it come on
all them that dwell on the face of the
whole earth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 Watch ye therefore, and pray
always, that ye may be accounted
worthy to escape all these things that
shall come to pass, and to stand before
the Son of man.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>

<div>
<head>§ 129. Transition to Christ's final coming. Exhortation.
Parables. (Third Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Mount of Olives</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXIV. 43-51. CH. XXV. 1-30.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 But know this, that if the good
man of the house had known in what
watch the thief would come, he would
have watched, and would not have
suffered his house to be broken up.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 Therefore be ye also ready: for
in such an hour as ye think not, the
Son of man cometh.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 Who then is a faithful and wise
servant, whom his lord hath made
ruler over his household, to give them
meat in due season?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46 Blessed <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> that servant, whom
his lord, when he cometh, shall find
so doing.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>47 Verily I say unto you, That
he shall make him ruler over all his
goods.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>48 But and if that evil servant shall
say in his heart, My lord delayeth his
coming;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>49 And shall begin to smite <hi rend='italic'>his</hi>
fellow-servants, and to eat and drink
with the drunken;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>50 The lord of that servant shall
come in a day when he looketh not
for <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, and in an hour that he is not
aware of,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>51 And shall cut him asunder, and
appoint <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> his portion with the
hypocrites: there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXV.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Then shall the kingdom of heaven
be likened unto ten virgins, which
took their lamps, and went forth to
meet the bridegroom.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And five of them were wise, and
five <hi rend='italic'>were</hi> foolish.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 They that <hi rend='italic'>were</hi> foolish took their
lamps, and took no oil with them:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 But the wise took oil in their vessels
with their lamps.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 While the bridegroom tarried,
they all slumbered and slept.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And at midnight there was a cry
made, Behold, the bridegroom cometh:
go ye out to meet him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 Then all those virgins arose, and
trimmed their lamps.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And the foolish said unto the
wise, Give us of your oil: for our
lamps are gone out.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 But the wise answered, saying,
<hi rend='italic'>Not so</hi>; lest there be not enough
for us and you: but go ye rather to
them that sell, and buy for yourselves.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And while they went to buy, the
bridegroom came; and they that were
ready, went in with him to the marriage:
and the door was shut.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 Afterward came also the other
virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to
us.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 But he answered and said,
Verily, I say unto you, I know you
not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 Watch therefore, for ye know
neither the day nor the hour wherein
the Son of man cometh.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 For <hi rend='italic'>the kingdom of heaven is</hi> as
a man travelling into a far country,
<hi rend='italic'>who</hi> called his own servants, and delivered
unto them his goods.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And unto one he gave five
talents, to another two, and to another
one; to every man according to his
several ability; and straightway took
his journey.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 Then he that had received the
five talents, went and traded with the
same, and made <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> other five
talents.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And likewise he that <hi rend='italic'>had received</hi>
two, he also gained other two.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 But he that had received one,
went and digged in the earth, and hid
his lord's money.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 After a long time the lord of
those servants cometh, and reckoneth
with them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And so he that had received five
talents, came and brought other five
talents, saying, Lord, thou deliveredst
unto me five talents: behold, I
have gained besides them five talents
more.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 His lord said unto him, Well
done, <hi rend='italic'>thou</hi> good and faithful servant;
thou hast been faithful over a few
things, I will make thee ruler over
many things: enter thou into the joy
of thy lord.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 He also that had received two
talents came, and said, Lord, thou
deliveredst unto me two talents: behold, I have gained two other talents
besides them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 His lord said unto him, Well
done, good and faithful servant; thou
hast been faithful over a few things,
I will make thee ruler over many
things: enter thou into the joy of thy
lord.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 Then he which had received
the one talent came, and said, Lord,
I knew thee that thou art an hard man,
reaping where thou hast not sown,
and gathering where thou hast not
strewed:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And I was afraid, and went and
hid thy talent in the earth: lo, <hi rend='italic'>there</hi>
thou hast <hi rend='italic'>that is</hi> thine.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 His lord answered and said unto
him, <hi rend='italic'>Thou</hi> wicked and slothful servant,
thou knewest<note place='foot'>Interrogatively and sarcastically. That is, Was such
thy wicked opinion? Then <q>out of thine own mouth will I judge thee;</q> thou oughtest
to have acted according to that opinion. Bp. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Sumner</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>in loc</hi>.</note> that I reap where
I sowed not, and gather where I have
not strewed:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 Thou oughtest therefore to have
put my money to the exchangers, and
then at my coming I should have received
mine own with usury.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 Take therefore the talent from
him, and give <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> unto him which hath
ten talents.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 For unto every one that hath
shall be given, and he shall have
abundance: but from him that hath
not, shall be taken away even that
which he hath.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And cast ye the unprofitable
servant into outer darkness: there
shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='404'/><anchor id='Pg404'/>

<div>
<head>§ 130. Scenes of the Judgment Day.
(Third Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Mount of Olives</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXV. 31-46.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 When the Son of man shall
come in his glory, and all the holy
angels with him, then shall he sit
upon the throne of his glory:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 And before him shall be gathered
all nations: and he shall separate
them one from another, as a
shepherd divideth <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> sheep from the
goats:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 And he shall set the sheep on
his right hand, but the goats on the
left.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>34 Then shall the King say unto
them on his right hand, Come, ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>35 For I was an hungered, and ye
gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye
gave me drink: I was a stranger, and
ye took me in:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 Naked, and ye clothed me: I
was sick, and ye visited me: I was in
prison, and ye came unto me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 Then shall the righteous answer
him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee
an hungered, and fed <hi rend='italic'>thee</hi>? or thirsty,
and gave <hi rend='italic'>thee</hi> drink?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 When saw we thee a stranger,
and took <hi rend='italic'>thee</hi> in? or naked, and
clothed <hi rend='italic'>thee</hi>?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 Or when saw we thee sick, or in
prison, and came unto thee?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 And the King shall answer and
say unto them, Verily I say unto you,
Inasmuch as ye have done <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> unto one
of the least of these my brethren, ye
have done <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> unto me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 Then shall he say also unto
them on the left hand, Depart from
me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 For I was an hungered, and ye
gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and
ye gave me no drink:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 I was a stranger, and ye took
me not in: naked, and ye clothed me
not: sick, and in prison, and ye visited
me not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 Then shall they also answer
him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee
an hungered, or athirst, or a stranger,
or naked, or sick, or in prison, and
did not minister unto thee?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 Then shall he answer them,
saying, Verily, I say unto you, Inasmuch
as ye did it not to one of the
least of these, ye did <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> not to me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46 And these shall go away into
everlasting punishment: but the righteous
into life eternal.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='408'/><anchor id='Pg408'/>

<div>
<head>§ 131. The Rulers conspire. The Supper at Bethany. Treachery
of Judas. (Fourth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem. Bethany</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVI. 1-16.</cell><cell>CH. XIV. 1-11.</cell></row>
<row><cell>And it came to pass, when Jesus
had finished all these sayings, he said|
unto his disciples,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 Ye know that after two days is
<hi rend='italic'>the feast of</hi> the passover, and the
Son of man is betrayed to be crucified.</cell><cell>After two days was <hi rend='italic'>the feast</hi> of
the passover, and of unleavened bread:
and the chief priests, and the scribes,
sought how they might take him by
craft, and put <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> to death.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 Then assembled together the
chief priests, and the scribes, and the
elders of the people, unto the palace
of the high priest, who was called
Caiaphas,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And consulted that they might
take Jesus by subtilty, and kill <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 But they said, Not on the <hi rend='italic'>feast-day</hi>,
lest there be an uproar among
the people.</cell><cell>2 But they said, Not on the <hi rend='italic'>feast-day</hi>,
lest there be an uproar of the people.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6 Now when Jesus was in Bethany,
in the house of Simon the leper,</cell><cell>3 And being in Bethany, in the
house of Simon the leper, as he sat
at meat, there came a woman having
an alabaster-box of ointment of spikenard,
very precious; and she brake
the box, and poured <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> on his head.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7 There came unto him a woman
having an alabaster-box of very precious
ointment, and poured <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> on his
head as he sat <hi rend='italic'>at meat</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 But when his disciples<note place='foot'>In St. John, Judas alone murmurs; in St. Matthew,
the disciples have indignation; or, as St. Mark expresses it, some have indignation among
themselves. Dr. Lardner says, Serm. v. 2, p. 316, <q>It is well known to be very
common with all writers, to use the plural number when one person only is intended.
Nor is it impossible that others might have some uneasiness about it, though they
were far from being so disgusted at it as Judas was. And their concern for the poor
was sincere; his was self-interested, and mere pretence.</q> See also Grotius <hi rend='italic'>in loc</hi>.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note> saw <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>,
they had indignation, saying, To what
purpose <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> this waste?</cell><cell>4 And there were some that had
indignation within themselves, and
said, Why was this waste of the ointment made?</cell></row>
<row><cell>9 For this ointment might have
been sold for much, and given to the
poor.</cell><cell>5 For it might have been sold for
more than three hundred pence, and
have been given to the poor. And
they murmured against her.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10 When Jesus understood <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, he
said unto them, Why trouble ye the
woman? for she hath wrought a good
work upon me.</cell><cell>6 And Jesus said, Let her alone:
why trouble ye her? she hath wrought
a good work on me.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11 For ye have the poor always
with you; but me ye have not always.</cell><cell>7 For ye have the poor with you
always, and whensoever ye will ye
may do them good: but me ye have
not always.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 For in that she hath poured this
ointment on my body, she did <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> for
my burial.</cell><cell>8 She hath done what she could:
she is come aforehand to anoint my
body to the burying.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13 Verily, I say unto you, Wheresoever
this gospel shall be preached in
the whole world, <hi rend='italic'>there</hi> shall also this,
that this woman hath done, be told for
a memorial of her.</cell><cell>9 Verily, I say unto you, Wheresoever
this gospel shall be preached
throughout the whole world, <hi rend='italic'>this</hi> also
that she hath done shall be spoken of,
for a memorial of her.</cell></row>
<row><cell>14 Then one of the twelve, called
Judas Iscariot, went unto the chief
priests,</cell><cell>10 And Judas Iscariot, one of the
twelve, went unto the chief priests, to
betray him unto them.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And said <hi rend='italic'>unto them</hi>, What will
ye give me, and I will deliver him
unto you? And they covenanted with
him for thirty pieces of silver.</cell><cell>11 And when they heard <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, they
were glad, and promised to give him
money. And he sought how he might
conveniently betray him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And from that time he sought
opportunity to betray him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXII. 1-6.</cell><cell>CH. XII. 2-8.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Now the feast of unleavened bread
drew nigh, which is called the Passover.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And the chief priests and scribes
sought how they might kill him: for
they feared the people.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2 There they made him a supper;
and Martha served: but Lazarus was
one of them that sat at the table with
him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>3 Then took Mary a pound of ointment
of spikenard, very costly, and
anointed the feet<note place='foot'>It is nowhere asserted that the unction was of Jesus's head
<emph>only</emph>, or of his feet <emph>only</emph>. Both actions are consistent; and St. John, in his supplemental
history, may very well have added the respectful conduct of Mary, that, after
having anointed Jesus's head, she proceeded to anoint his feet, and even to wipe them with
her hair. Newcome.</note> of Jesus, and wiped
his feet with her hair: and the house
was filled with the odour of the ointment.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>4 Then saith one of his disciples,
Judas Iscariot,<note place='foot'>The other Evangelists mention that indignation was
caused by the supposed waste of the ointment: John fixes it upon Judas. That Judas
went to the High Priest's on the evening or night of our Wednesday, may be collected
from Matth. xxvi. 14, 17, and the parallel places; and he seems to have acted partly
from disgust at what had passed. The story has a remarkably apt connection with
the preceding and subsequent history. The Jewish rulers consult how they may take
Jesus by craft, and without raising a tumult among the people. An incident happens,
which offends one of Jesus's familiar attendants, who immediately repairs to the enemies
of Jesus, and receives from them a bribe to betray him in the absence of the multitude.
Newcome.</note> Simon's <hi rend='italic'>son</hi>, which
should betray him,</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5 Why was not this ointment sold
for three hundred pence, and given to
the poor?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>6 This he said, not that he cared
for the poor, but because he was a
thief, and had the bag, and bare what
was put therein.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>7 Then said Jesus, Let her alone:
against the day of my burying hath
she kept this.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>8 For the poor always ye have with
you; but me ye have not always.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 Then entered Satan into Judas,
surnamed Iscariot, being of the number
of the twelve.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And he went his way, and communed
with the chief priests and captains,
how he might betray him unto
them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And they were glad, and covenanted
to give him money.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And he promised, and sought
opportunity to betray him unto them
in the absence of the multitude.</cell><cell></cell></row>

</table>

</div>

<pb n='410'/><anchor id='Pg410'/>

<div>
<head>§ 132. Preparation for the Passover.
(Fifth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem. Bethany</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVI. 17-19.</cell><cell>CH. XIV. 12-16.</cell></row>
<row><cell>17 Now the first <hi rend='italic'>day</hi> of the <hi rend='italic'>feast of</hi>
unleavened bread, the disciples came
to Jesus, saying unto him, Where
wilt thou that we prepare for thee to
eat the passover?</cell><cell>12 And the first day of unleavened
bread, when they killed the passover,
his disciples said unto him, Where
wilt thou that we go and prepare, that
thou mayest eat the passover?</cell></row>
<row><cell>18 And he said, Go into the city to
such a man, and say unto him, The
Master saith, My time is at hand; I
will keep the passover at thy house
with my disciples.<note place='foot'>Here is a very natural, yet incidental recognition
of a rule, universally respected among the Jews, that this feast was to be celebrated not
alone, but by companies of not less than ten persons. See <hi rend='smallcaps'>Josephus</hi>, Bell. Jud. vi. ix. § 3.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Blunt</hi>, Veracity, &amp;c. Sect. ii. 8.</note></cell><cell>13 And he sendeth forth two of
his disciples, and saith unto them,
Go ye into the city, and there shall
meet you a man bearing a pitcher of
water: follow him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14 And wheresoever he shall go
in, say ye to the good man of the
house, The Master saith, Where is
the guest-chamber, where I shall eat
the passover with my disciples?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15 And he will shew you a large
upper room furnished <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> prepared:
there make ready for us.</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And the disciples did as Jesus
had appointed them; and they made
ready the passover.</cell><cell>16 And his disciples when forth,
and came into the city, and found as
he had said unto them: and they
made ready the passover.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXII. 7-13.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 Thence came the day of unleavened
bread, when the passover must be
killed.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And he sent Peter and John,
saying, Go and prepare us the passover,
that we may eat.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And they said unto him, Where
wilt thou that we prepare?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And he said unto them, Behold,
when ye are entered into the city,
there shall a man meet you, bearing a
pitcher of water; follow him into the
house where he entereth in.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And ye shall say unto the good
man of the house, The Master saith
unto thee, Where is the guest-chamber,
where I shall eat the passover
with my disciples?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And he shall shew you a large
upper room furnished: there make
ready.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And they went and found as he
had said unto them: and they made
ready the passover.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='413'/><anchor id='Pg413'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part VIII. The Fourth Passover; Our Lord's Passion; And The
Accompanying Events Until The End Of The Jewish Sabbath.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Time.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Two days</hi>.
</p>

<pb n='414'/><anchor id='Pg414'/>

<div>
<head>§ 133. The Passover Meal. Contention among the Twelve.
(Evening Introducing The Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVI. 20.</cell><cell>CH. XIV. 17.</cell></row>
<row><cell>20 Now when the even was come,
he sat down with the twelve.</cell><cell>17 And in the evening he cometh
with the twelve.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXII. 14-18, 24-30.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And when the hour was come,
he sat down, and the twelve apostles
with him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And he said unto them, With
desire I have desired to eat this passover
with you before I suffer.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 For I say unto you, I will not
any more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled
in the kingdom of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And he took the cup, and gave
thanks, and said, Take this, and divide
<hi rend='italic'>it</hi> among yourselves.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 For I say unto you, I will not
drink of the fruit of the vine, until the
kingdom of God shall come.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 And there was also a strife
among them, which of them should
be accounted the greatest.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And he said unto them, The
kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship
over them; and they that exercise
authority upon them are called
benefactors.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 But ye <hi rend='italic'>shall</hi> not <hi rend='italic'>be</hi> so: but he
that is greatest among you, let him be
as the younger; and he that is chief,
as he that doth serve.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 For whether <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> greater, he that
sitteth at meat, or he that serveth? <hi rend='italic'>is</hi>
not he that sitteth at meat? but I am
among you as he that serveth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 Ye are they which have continued
with me in my temptations.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And I appoint unto you a kingdom,
as my Father hath appointed
unto me;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 That ye may eat and drink at
my table in my kingdom, and sit on
thrones, judging the twelve tribes of
Israel.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 134. Jesus washes the feet of his disciples. (Evening
Introducing The Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XII. 1-20.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Now before the feast of the passover,
when Jesus knew that his hour
was come that he should depart out of
this world unto the Father, having
loved his own which were in the
world, he loved them unto the end.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And supper being ended, (the
devil having now put into the heart
of Judas Iscariot, Simon's <hi rend='italic'>son</hi>, to
betray him,)</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 Jesus knowing that the Father
had given all things into his hands,
and that he was come from God, and
went to God;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 He riseth from supper, and laid
aside his garments; and took a towel,
and girded himself.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 After that, he poureth water into
a basin, and began to wash the disciples'
feet, and to wipe <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> with the
towel wherewith he was girded.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 Then cometh he to Simon Peter:
and Peter saith unto him, Lord, dost
thou wash my feet?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 Jesus answered and said unto
him, What I do thou knowest not
now; but thou shalt know hereafter.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 Peter saith unto him, Thou shalt
never wash my feet. Jesus answered
him, If I wash thee not, thou hast
no part with me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 Simon Peter saith unto him,
Lord, not my feet only, but also <hi rend='italic'>my</hi>
hands and <hi rend='italic'>my</hi> head.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 Jesus saith to him, He that is
washed needeth not save to wash <hi rend='italic'>his</hi>
feet, but is clean every whit: and ye
are clean, but not all.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 For he knew who should betray
him: therefore said he, Ye are not all
clean.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 So after he had washed their
feet, and had taken his garments,
and was set down again, he said unto
them, Know ye what I have done to
you?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 Ye call me Master, and Lord:
and ye say well; for <hi rend='italic'>so</hi> I am.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 If I then, <hi rend='italic'>your</hi> Lord and Master,
have washed your feet; ye also ought
to wash one another's feet.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 For I have given you an example,
that ye should do as I have done
to you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 Verily, verily, I say unto you,
The servant is not greater than his
lord; neither he that is sent greater
than he that sent him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 If ye know these things, happy
are ye if ye do them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 I speak not of you all; I know
whom I have chosen; but that the
scripture may be fulfilled, He that
eateth bread with me, hath lifted up
his heel against me.<note place='foot'>Ps. xli. 10.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 Now I tell you before it come,
that when it is come to pass, ye may
believe that I am <hi rend='italic'>he</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 Verily, verily, I say unto you,
He that receiveth whomsoever I send,
receiveth me; and he that receiveth
me, receiveth him that sent me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='418'/><anchor id='Pg418'/>

<div>
<head>§ 135. Jesus points out the traitor. Judas withdraws.
(Evening Introducing The Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVI. 21-25.</cell><cell>CH. XIV. 18-21.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21 And as they did eat, he said,
Verily I say unto you, That one of
you shall betray me.</cell><cell>18 And as they sat, and did eat,
Jesus said, Verily I say unto you,
One of you which eateth with me,
shall betray me.</cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And they were exceeding sorrowful,
and began every one of them
to say unto him, Lord, is it I?</cell><cell>19 And they began to be sorrowful,
and to say unto him one by one, <hi rend='italic'>Is</hi> it
I? and another <hi rend='italic'>said</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Is</hi> it I?</cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And he answered and said, He
that dippeth <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> hand with me in the
dish, the same shall betray me.</cell><cell>20 And he answered and said unto
them, <hi rend='italic'>It is</hi> one of the twelve that dippeth
with me in the dish.</cell></row>
<row><cell>24 The Son of man goeth, as it is
written of him: but wo unto that man
by whom the Son of man is betrayed!
it had been good for that man if he had
not been born.</cell><cell>21 The Son of man indeed goeth,
as it is written of him: but wo to that
man by whom the Son of man is betrayed!
good were it for that man if
he had never been born.</cell></row>
<row><cell>25 Then Judas, which betrayed
him, answered and said, Master, is
it I? He said unto him, Thou hast
said.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXII. 21-23.</cell><cell>CH. XIII. 21-35.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21 But behold, the hand of him
that betrayeth me <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> with me on the
table.</cell><cell>21 When Jesus had thus said, he
was troubled in spirit, and testified,
and said, Verily, verily, I say unto
you, that one of you shall betray me.</cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And truly the Son of man goeth
as it was determined: but wo unto
that man by whom he is betrayed!</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22 Then the disciples looked one
on another, doubting of whom he
spake.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>23 Now there was leaning on Jesus'
bosom, one of his disciples, whom
Jesus loved.</cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And they began to inquire
among themselves, which of them it
was that should do this thing.</cell><cell>24 Simon Peter therefore beckoned
to him, that he should ask who it
should be of whom he spake.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>25 He then, lying on Jesus' breast,
saith unto him, Lord, who is it?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>26 Jesus answered, He it is to
whom I shall give a sop, when I have
dipped <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>. And when he had dipped
the sop, he gave <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> to Judas Iscariot
<hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of Simon.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>27 And after the sop Satan entered
into him. Then said Jesus unto him,
That thou doest, do quickly.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>28 Now no man at the table knew
for what intent he spake this unto
him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>29 For some <hi rend='italic'>of them</hi> thought, because
Judas had the bag, that Jesus
had said unto him, Buy <hi rend='italic'>those things</hi>
that we have need of against the
feast; or, that he should give something
to the poor.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>30 He then, having received the
sop, went immediately out: and it
was night.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31 Therefore, when he was gone
out, Jesus said, Now is the Son of
man glorified, and God is glorified in
him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>32 If God be glorified in him, God
shall also glorify him in himself, and
shall straightway glorify him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>33 Little children, yet a little while
I am with you. Ye shall seek me;
and, as I said unto the Jews, Whither
I go, ye cannot come, so now I say to
you.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>34 A new commandment I give
unto you, That ye love one another;
as I have loved you, that ye also love
one another.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35 By this shall all <hi rend='italic'>men</hi> know that
ye are my disciples, if ye have love
one to another.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='420'/><anchor id='Pg420'/>

<div>
<head>§ 136. Jesus foretells the fall of Peter, and the dispersion of the Twelve.
(Evening Introducing The Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVI. 31-35.</cell><cell>CH. XIV. 27-31.</cell></row>
<row><cell>31 Then saith Jesus unto them,
All ye shall be offended because of
me this night: for it is written, I will
smite the Shepherd, and the sheep of
the flock shall be scattered abroad.<note place='foot'>Zech. xiii. 7.</note></cell><cell>27 And Jesus saith unto them, All
ye shall be offended because of me
this night: for it is written, I will
smite the Shepherd, and the sheep
shall be scattered.</cell></row>
<row><cell>32 But after I am risen again, I
will go before you into Galilee.</cell><cell>28 But after that I am risen, I will
go before you into Galilee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>33 Peter answered and said unto
him, Though all <hi rend='italic'>men</hi> shall be offended
because of thee, <hi rend='italic'>yet</hi> will I never be
offended.</cell><cell>29 But Peter said unto him, Although
all shall be offended, yet <hi rend='italic'>will</hi>
not I.</cell></row>
<row><cell>34 Jesus said unto him, Verily, I
say unto thee, That this night, before
the cock crow, thou shalt deny me
thrice.</cell><cell>30 And Jesus saith unto him, Verily,
I say unto thee, That this day, <hi rend='italic'>even</hi> in
this night, before the cock crow twice,<note place='foot'>The other Evangelists simply say, Before
the cock crow.&mdash;It is observed, that the cock crows about midnight: and about the fourth
watch, or about three in the morning, when that watch began. When <hi rend='italic'>gallicinium (cock-crowing)</hi>
stands alone, it means this latter time, which is referred to, Aristoph. Eccles. 390,
Juv. Sat. ix. 107. The four Evangelists therefore denote the same time,&mdash;sc. galliciniis
secundis, as Ammianus expresses it, 1. 22; and any part of the period thus marked out
may be understood. See <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bochart</hi> de anim. pars, 2d. 119, and <hi rend='smallcaps'>Grotius</hi> on Matth.
xxvi. 34. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note>
thou shalt deny me thrice.</cell></row>
<row><cell>35 Peter said unto him, Though I
should die with thee, yet will not I
deny thee. Likewise also said all the
disciples.</cell><cell>31 But he spake the more vehemently,
If I should die with thee, I
will not deny thee in any wise. Likewise
also said they all.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXII. 31-38.</cell><cell>CH. XIII. 36-38.</cell></row>
<row><cell>31 And the Lord said, Simon,
Simon, behold, Satan hath desired <hi rend='italic'>to
have</hi> you, that he may sift <hi rend='italic'>you</hi> as
wheat:</cell><cell>36 Simon Peter said unto him,
Lord, whither goest thou? Jesus answered
him, Whither I go, thou canst
not follow me now; but thou shalt
follow me afterward.</cell></row>
<row><cell>32 But I have prayed for thee,
that thy faith fail not: and when
thou art converted, strengthen thy
brethren.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 And he said unto him, Lord, I
am ready to go with thee, both into
prison, and to death.</cell><cell>37 Peter said unto him, Lord, why
cannot I follow thee now? I will lay
down my life for thy sake.</cell></row>
<row><cell>34 And he said, I tell thee, Peter,
the cock shall not crow this day, before
that thou shalt thrice deny that
thou knowest me.</cell><cell>38 Jesus answered him, Wilt thou
lay down thy life for my sake? Verily,
verily, I say unto thee, The cock shall
not crow, till thou hast denied me thrice.</cell></row>
<row><cell>35 And he said unto them, When
I sent you without purse, and scrip,
and shoes, lacked ye any thing? And
they said, Nothing.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 Then said he unto them, But
now, he that hath a purse, let him
take <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, and likewise <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> scrip: and he
that hath no sword, let him sell his
garment, and buy one.<note place='foot'>In the animated language of the prophets, their predictions are often announced under
the form of commands. The prophet Isaiah, in the sublime prediction he has given
us of the fate of the king of Babylon, thus foretells the destruction of his family:&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Prepare
slaughter for his children</hi>, &amp;c. Isa. xiv. 21. The prophet Jeremiah in like
manner foretells the approaching destruction of the children of Zion: <hi rend='italic'>Call for the
mourning women, that they may come: and send for cunning women; and let them
make haste, and take up a wailing</hi>, &amp;c. Jer. ix. 17, 18. There, matter of sorrow is predicted,
by commanding the common attendants on mourning and lamentation to be gotten
in readiness; here, warning is given of the most imminent dangers, by orders to make
the customary preparation against violence, and to account a weapon more necessary than
a garment. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Campbell</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>in loc</hi>.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 For I say unto you, that this
that is written must yet be accomplished
in me, And he was reckoned
among the transgressors:<note place='foot'>Isa. liii. 12.</note> for the
things concerning me have an end.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 And they said, Lord, behold,
here are two swords. And he said
unto them, It is enough.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='422'/><anchor id='Pg422'/>

<div>
<head>§ 137. The Lord's Supper. (Evening Introducing
The Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVI. 26-29.</cell><cell>CH. XIV. 22-25.</cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And<note place='foot'>This account of the institution of the Lord's Supper is
corroborated by that of Paul, in 1 Cor. xi. 23-25, which is usually inserted by Harmonists
in this place as parallel testimony; but as the plan of this work leads me to deal
with the four Gospels alone, the insertion of other parts of Scripture in the text, here and
elsewhere, is omitted.</note> as they were eating,<note place='foot'>The Evangelists have determined, by some
general expressions, the order of the following events between the sitting down to the
paschal supper, and the going to Gethsemane. Before the eating of the paschal lamb,
Jesus rises from supper to wash the disciples' feet. John xiii. 1, 4. While they are
eating, a declaration is made of Judas's treachery, and the bread is instituted, Matt.
xxvi. 21, 26. See also Mark. After, the cup is instituted, Luke xxii. 20; 1 Cor. xi.
25. But as to the particular and precise order of the facts and discourses during this
period, Pilkington's words relating to one of them are applicable to all. <q>It is observable
that St. Luke mentions the institution of the communion before the declaration
of Judas's treachery; whereas the other Evangelists place these in a different
order. But it is a liberty I think very allowable in any historian, to neglect taking notice
of the exact order of all the facts, when he is only giving a general account of what was
done at a certain time. And if so, whichsoever was the true successive order, there can
be no just imputation upon any of the Evangelists for neglecting to observe it in the narration.</q>
Harm. p. 52. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note> Jesus
took bread, and blessed <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, and brake
<hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, and gave <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> to the disciples, and
said, Take, eat; this is my body.</cell><cell>22 And as they did eat, Jesus took
bread, and blessed, and brake <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, and
gave to them, and said, Take, eat:
this is my body.</cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And he took the cup, and gave
thanks, and gave <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> to them, saying,
Drink ye all of it;</cell><cell>23 And he took the cup, and when
he had given thanks, he gave <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> to
them: and they all drank of it.</cell></row>
<row><cell>28 For this is my blood of the new
testament,<note place='foot'><p>The use of the word <hi rend='italic'>testament</hi>,
(<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>diatheke</foreign>,) in a sense involving also the idea of a <hi rend='italic'>covenant</hi>, and in connexion with the
circumstances of a compact, has greatly perplexed many English readers of the Bible.
The difficulty occurs in Matt. 26, 28, and the parallel places, where our Lord employs the
word <hi rend='italic'>testament</hi>, or last will, in connexion with the sacrificial shedding of his own blood;
a ceremony which, by means of a suitable animal, usually was adopted among the
ancients, upon the making of the most solemn engagements; and instead of which,
the mutual partaking of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, by the contracting parties,
was substituted among Christians in later times. The same embarrassment occurs,
perhaps in a greater degree, in the exposition of several passages in the eighth and ninth
chapters of the Epistle to the Hebrews, (manifestly written by a profound lawyer, be he
Paul or Apollos), where he uses language applicable indifferently both to a covenant <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>inter
vivos</foreign> and a last will. For with us, a testament is simply a declaration of the last will of
the testator, in regard to the disposition of his property after his decease, irrespective of
any consent, or even knowledge, at the time, on the part of him to whom the estate
is given; while a covenant requires the mutual consent of both parties, as essential to its
existence. The one is simply the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ultima voluntas</foreign> of an individual, the other is the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>aggregatio mentium</foreign> of both or all.
</p>
<p>
The solution of this difficulty belongs rather to theologians, whose province it is by no
means intended here to invade; but perhaps a reference to the laws and usages in force in
Judea in the times of our Saviour and his Apostles may furnish some aid, which a lawyer
might contribute without transgressing the limit of his profession.
</p>
<p>
It is first to be observed that the municipal laws of Greece and Rome were strikingly
similar; those of Greece having been freely imported into the Roman jurisprudence.
In like manner, the similarity of the Grecian laws and usages with those extant in Asia
Minor, indicated a common origin; and thus, what Greece derived from Egypt and
the states of Asia Minor, these states, after many ages, received again as the laws of their
Roman masters. It should also be remembered that Palestine had been reduced to a
Roman province some years before the time of our Saviour; long enough, indeed, to have
become familiar with Roman laws and usages, even had they been previously unknown;
and that Paul, to whom the Epistle to the Hebrews is generally attributed, was himself a
thorough-bred lawyer, well versed in the customs of his country, whether ancient or
modern. Among those nations, the civil magistrate often exercised the functions of the
priesthood, these dignities being in some respects identical; and thus, whatever was
transacted before the magistrate, might naturally seem to partake of the character of
an act of religion. Covenants were always made with particular formalities, and to
those of graver nature, religious solemnities were often superadded. They were frequently
confirmed by an oath, the most solemn form of which was taken standing before the altar;
and whosoever swore by the altar, swore by the sacrifice thereon, and was held as firmly
bound as though he had passed between the dismembered parts of the victim. Of the
latter kind was the oath, by which God confirmed his covenant with Abraham (Gen. xv.)
when the visible light of his presence passed between the pieces which the patriarch had
divided and laid <q>each piece one against another.</q>
</p>
<p>
With these things in view, we may now look at some of the modes of transferring
property, practised by the nations alluded to.
</p>
<p>
Among the methods of alienation or sale of property by the owner, in his lifetime, was
that which in the Roman law was termed <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>mancipatio</foreign>; a mode by which the vendor
conveyed property to the purchaser, each party being present, either in person or by his
agent, representative, or factor. Five witnesses were requisite, one of whom was called
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>libripens</foreign>, or the balance-holder. This form had its origin in the sale of goods by weight,
but was gradually extended to all sales; and the practice was for the buyer to strike the
balance with a piece of money called a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sestertius</foreign>, which was immediately paid over to the
vendor as part of the price; and hence the expression <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per æs et libram vendere</foreign>.
</p>
<p>
Wills or testaments were made with great solemnity. One method among the Romans,
probably common, in its principal traits, to the other nations before mentioned, was termed
the testament <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per æs et libram</foreign>, it being effected in the form of a sale. This mode seems
to have been resorted to whenever the estate was given to a stranger, (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>hæres extraneus</foreign>,) to
the exclusion of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>hæres suus</foreign>, or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessarius</foreign>, or, as we should say, the heir at law; and
it was founded on the purchase of the estate by the adopted heir, who succeeded to the privileges
of the child. The forms of a sale by <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>mancipatio</foreign> were therefore scrupulously
observed; the presence and agreement of the purchaser, either in person or by his representative
or negotiator, being necessary to its validity. The reason for requiring this form
was because it <emph>involved a covenant</emph> on the part of the adopted heir or legatee, by which he
became bound to pay all the debts of the testator. Having entered into this covenant, he
had the best possible title in law to the inheritance, namely, that of a purchaser for a
valuable consideration. Among the Greeks, and probably among the Romans also, this
was transacted in the presence of a magistrate, who sanctioned it by his sentence of
approval. This was the most ancient form of a will; and it does not seem to have been
abrogated until the time of Constantine.
</p>
<p>
Now, when our Saviour speaks of the <hi rend='italic'>new testament in his blood</hi>, or of his <hi rend='italic'>blood of the
new testament</hi>, and when Paul uses similar forms of expression may not the figure have
reference to the custom above stated? And if so, may not this custom guide us to the
true meaning of the words? Does it intimate to us that the promised inheritance was
first given to man, as it were by a testament in this ancient form, upon a covenant of <emph>his
own perfect obedience</emph> to every part of the law of God; that having broken this covenant,
his title became forfeited; that the inheritance was afterwards promised, in the same
manner, to every one, Jew or Gentile, upon a new covenant and condition, namely of a
true <emph>faith</emph> in Christ; a faith evinced in the fruits of a holy life; that this inheritance by a
new testament and covenant was negociated, as it were, and obtained for man by the
mediation of Jesus Christ, (<q>the mediator of the new testament,</q> Heb. 9. 15,) as the representative
of all who should accept it by such faith, and their surety for the performance
of its conditions; that it was purchased by <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> obedience and solemnized by the sacrifice of
himself as the victim?
</p>
<p>
This solution is suggested with much diffidence. That it carries these passages clear of
all difficulty is not pretended. The very nature of the subject renders it difficult of illustration
by any reference to human affairs; and the embarrassment is proportionally
increased, whenever the simile is pressed beyond its principal point of resemblance.
</p>
<p>
See Ayliffe's Pandect, pp. 349, 393, 367-369. Book iii. tit. xii. xv. Leges Atticæ,
De Testamentis, &amp;c. tit. vi. S. Petit. Comm. in Leges Attic. p. 479-481. Justin, Inst.
lib. 2. tit. 10, § 1. Ibid. tit. 19, § 5, 6. Cooper's Justinian, p. 487. Cod. lib. 6. tit. 23,
1. 15. Fuss's Roman Antiq. ch. 1, § 87, 97, 103, 107, 183. Michaelis, LL. Moses, vol.
4, art. 302. Bp. Patrick, quoted in Bush's Illustrations, p. 254.</p></note> which is shed for many for
the remission of sins.</cell><cell>24 And he said unto them, This
is my blood of the new testament,
which is shed for many.</cell></row>
<row><cell>29 But I say unto you, I will not
drink henceforth of this fruit of the
vine, until that day when I drink it
new with you in my Father's kingdom.</cell><cell>25 Verily, I say unto you, I will
drink no more of the fruit of the vine,
until that day that I drink it new in
the kingdom of God.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXII. 19-20.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And he took bread, and gave
thanks, and brake <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, and gave unto
them, saying, This is my body which
is given for you: this do in remembrance
of me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 Likewise also the cup after supper,
saying, This cup <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> the new
testament in my blood, which is shed
for you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='424'/><anchor id='Pg424'/>

<div>
<head>§ 138. Jesus comforts his disciples. The Holy Spirit promised.
(Evening Introducing The Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIV. 1-31.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Let not your heart be troubled: ye
believe in God, believe also in me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 In my Father's house are many
mansions; if <hi rend='italic'>it were</hi> not <hi rend='italic'>so</hi>, I would
have told you. I go to prepare a
place for you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And if I go and prepare a place
for you, I will come again and receive
you unto myself; that where I am,
<hi rend='italic'>there</hi> ye may be also.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And whither I go ye know, and
the way ye know.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 Thomas saith unto him, Lord,
we know not whither thou goest; and
how can we know the way?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 Jesus saith unto him, I am the
way, and the truth, and the life: no
man cometh unto the Father, but by
me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 If ye had known me, ye should
have known my Father also: and
from henceforth ye know him, and
have seen him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 Philip saith unto him, Lord,
shew us the Father, and it sufficeth
us.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 Jesus saith unto him, Have I
been so long time with you, and yet
hast thou not known me, Philip? he
that hath seen me, hath seen the
Father; and how sayest thou <hi rend='italic'>then</hi>,
Shew us the Father?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 Believest thou not that I am in
the Father, and the Father in me?
the words that I speak unto you, I
speak not of myself: but the Father,
that dwelleth in me, he doeth the
works.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 Believe me that I <hi rend='italic'>am</hi> in the
Father, and the Father in me: or else
believe me for the very works' sake.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 Verily, verily, I say unto you,
He that believeth on me, the works
that I do shall he do also; and greater
<hi rend='italic'>works</hi> than these shall he do; because
I go unto my Father.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And whatsoever ye shall ask in
my name, that will I do, that the
Father may be glorified in the Son.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 If ye shall ask any thing in my
name, I will do <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 If ye love me, keep my commandments:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And I will pray the Father,
and he shall give you another Comforter,
that he may abide with you for
ever;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 <hi rend='italic'>Even</hi> the Spirit of truth; whom
the world cannot receive, because it
seeth him not, neither knoweth him:
but ye know him; for he dwelleth
with you, and shall be in you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 I will not leave you comfortless:
I will come to you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 Yet a little while, and the world
seeth me no more; but ye see me:
because I live, ye shall live also.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 At that day ye shall know that
I <hi rend='italic'>am</hi> in my Father, and ye in me, and
I in you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 He that hath my commandments,
and keepeth them, he it is
that loveth me: and he that loveth
me, shall be loved of my Father, and
I will love him, and will manifest
myself to him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 Judas saith unto him, (not
Iscariot) Lord, how is it that thou
wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not
unto the world?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 Jesus answered and said unto
him, If a man love me, he will keep
my words: and my Father will love
him, and we will come unto him, and
make our abode with him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 He that loveth me not, keepeth
not my sayings: and the word which
ye hear is not mine, but the Father's
which sent me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 These things have I spoken unto
you, being <hi rend='italic'>yet</hi> present with you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 But the Comforter, <hi rend='italic'>which is</hi> the
Holy Ghost, whom the Father will
send in my name, he shall teach you
all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said
unto you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 Peace I leave with you, my
peace I give unto you: not as the
world giveth, give I unto you. Let
not your heart be troubled, neither let
it be afraid.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 Ye have heard how I said unto
you, I go away, and come <hi rend='italic'>again</hi> unto
you. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice,
because I said, I go unto the
Father: for my Father is greater
than I.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And now I have told you before
it come to pass, that when it is come
to pass, ye might believe.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 Hereafter I will not talk much
with you: for the prince of this world
cometh, and hath nothing in me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 But that the world may know
that I love the Father; and as the
Father gave me commandment, even
so I do. Arise, let us go hence.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='428'/><anchor id='Pg428'/>

<div>
<head>§ 139. Christ the true Vine. His disciples hated by the world.
(Evening Introducing The Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XV. 1-27.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>I am the true vine, and my Father
is the husbandman.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 Every branch in me that beareth
not fruit, he taketh away: and every
<hi rend='italic'>branch</hi> that beareth fruit, he purgeth
it, that it may bring forth more fruit.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 Now ye are clean through the
word which I have spoken unto you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 Abide in me, and I in you. As
the branch cannot bear fruit of itself,
except it abide in the vine: no more
can ye, except ye abide in me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 I am the vine, ye <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> the branches:
He that abideth in me, and I in him,
the same bringeth forth much fruit:
for without me ye can do nothing.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 If a man abide not in me, he is
cast forth as a branch, and is withered;
and men gather them, and cast
<hi rend='italic'>them</hi> into the fire, and they are
burned.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 If ye abide in me, and my words
abide in you, ye shall ask what ye
will, and it shall be done unto you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 Herein is my Father glorified,
that ye bear much fruit; so shall ye
be my disciples.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 As the Father hath loved me,
so have I loved you: continue ye in
my love.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 If ye keep my commandments,
ye shall abide in my love; even as I
have kept my Father's commandments,
and abide in his love.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 These things have I spoken unto
you, that my joy might remain in you,
and <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> your joy might be full.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 This is my commandment, That
ye love one another, as I have loved you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 Greater love hath no man than
this, that a man lay down his life for
his friends.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 Ye are my friends, if ye do
whatsoever I command you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 Henceforth I call you not servants;
for the servant knoweth not
what his lord doeth: but I have called
you friends; for all things that I have
heard of my Father, I have made
known unto you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 Ye have not chosen me, but
I have chosen you, and ordained you,
that ye should go and bring forth
fruit, and <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> your fruit should remain:
that whatsoever ye shall ask
of the Father in my name, he may
give it to you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 These things I command you,
that ye love one another.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 If the world hate you, ye know
that it hated me before <hi rend='italic'>it hated</hi> you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 If ye were of the world, the
world would love his own; but because ye are not of the world, but I
have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hateth you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 Remember the word that I said
unto you, The servant is not greater
than his lord. If they have persecuted
me, they will also persecute you: if
they have kept my saying, they will
keep yours also.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 But all these things will they
do unto you for my name's sake, because
they know not him that sent
me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 If I had not come and spoken
unto them, they had not had sin: but
now they have no cloak for their sin.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 He that hateth me, hateth my
Father also.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 If I had not done among them
the works which none other man did,
they had not had sin: but now have
they both seen, and hated both me
and my Father.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 But <hi rend='italic'>this cometh to pass</hi>, that the
word might be fulfilled that is written
in their law, They hated me without
a cause.<note place='foot'> Ps. lxix. 5.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 But when the Comforter is come,
whom I will send unto you from the
Father, <hi rend='italic'>even</hi> the Spirit of truth, which
proceedeth from the Father, he shall
testify of me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And ye also shall bear witness,
because ye have been with me from
the beginning.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='432'/><anchor id='Pg432'/>

<div>
<head>§ 140. Persecution foretold. Further promise of the Holy Spirit.
(Evening Introducing The Sixth Day Of The Week.)  <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVI. 1-33.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>These things have I spoken unto
you, that ye should not be offended.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 They shall put you out of the
synagogues: yea, the time cometh,
that whosoever killeth you, will think
that he doeth God service.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And these things will they do
unto you, because they have not
known the Father, nor me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 But these things have I told you,
that when the time shall come, ye may
remember that I told you of them.
And these things I said not unto you
at the beginning because I was with
you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 But now I go my way to him that
sent me, and none of you asketh me,
Whither goest thou?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 But because I have said these
things unto you, sorrow hath filled
your heart.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 Nevertheless, I tell you the
truth: It is expedient for you that
I go away: for if I go not away, the
Comforter will not come unto you;
but if I depart, I will send him unto
you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And when he is come, he will
reprove the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 Of sin, because they believe not
on me;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 Of righteousness, because I go
to my Father, and ye see me no
more;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 Of judgment, because the prince
of this world is judged.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 I have yet many things to say
unto you, but ye cannot bear them
now.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 Howbeit, when he, the Spirit of
truth is come, he will guide you into
all truth: for he shall not speak of
himself; but whatsoever he shall
hear, <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> shall he speak: and he will
shew you things to come.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 He shall glorify me: for he
shall receive of mine, and shall shew
<hi rend='italic'>it</hi> unto you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 All things that the Father hath
are mine: therefore said I, that he
shall take of mine, and shall shew it
unto you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 A little while, and ye shall not
see me: and again, a little while, and
ye shall see me, because I go to the
Father.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 Then said <hi rend='italic'>some</hi> of his disciples
among themselves, What is this that
he saith unto us, A little while, and
ye shall not see me: and again, a
little while, and ye shall see me;
and, Because I go to the Father?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 They said therefore, What is
this that he saith, A little while?
we cannot tell what he saith.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 Now Jesus knew that they were
desirous to ask him, and said unto
them, Do ye inquire among yourselves
of that I said, A little while, and ye
shall not see me: and again, a little
while, and ye shall see me?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 Verily, verily, I say unto you,
that ye shall weep and lament, but
the world shall rejoice: and ye shall
be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be
turned into joy.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 A woman when she is in travail
hath sorrow, because her hour is
come: but as soon as she is delivered
of the child, she remembereth no more
the anguish, for joy that a man is
born into the world.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And ye now therefore have sorrow:
but I will see you again, and
your heart shall rejoice, and your joy
no man taketh from you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And in that day ye shall ask
me nothing. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask
the Father in my name, he will give
<hi rend='italic'>it</hi> you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 Hitherto have ye asked nothing
in my name: ask, and ye shall receive,
that your joy may be full.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 These things have I spoken
unto you in proverbs: but the time
cometh when I shall no more speak
unto you in proverbs, but I shall shew
you plainly of the Father.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 At that day ye shall ask in my
name: and I say not unto you, that I
will pray the Father for you:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 For the Father himself loveth
you, because ye have loved me, and
have believed that I came out from
God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 I came forth from the Father,
and am come into the world: again,
I leave the world, and go to the
Father.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 His disciples said unto him, Lo,
now speakest thou plainly, and speakest
no proverb.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 Now are we sure that thou
knowest all things, and needest not
that any man should ask thee: by
this we believe that thou camest forth
from God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 Jesus answered them, Do ye
now believe?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 Behold, the hour cometh, yea,
is now come, that ye shall be scattered
every man to his own, and
shall leave me alone: and yet I am
not alone, because the Father is with
me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 These things I have spoken unto
you, that in me ye might have peace.
In the world ye shall have tribulation,
but be of good cheer: I have overcome the world.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='438'/><anchor id='Pg438'/>

<div>
<head>§ 141. Christ's last prayer with his disciples. (Evening
Introducing The Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVII. 1-26.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>These words spake Jesus, and
lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said,
Father, the hour is come; glorify thy
Son, that thy Son also may glorify
thee:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 As thou hast given him power
over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to as many as thou hast
given him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And this is life eternal, that they
might know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 I have glorified thee on the earth:
I have finished the work which thou
gavest me to do.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And now, O Father, glorify thou
me with thine own self, with the glory
which I had with thee before the
world was.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 I have manifested thy name unto
the men which thou gavest me out of
the world: thine they were, and thou
gavest them me; and they have kept
thy word.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 Now they have known that all
things whatsoever thou hast given me
are of thee:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 For I have given unto them the
words which thou gavest me; and
they have received <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>, and have
known surely that I came out from
thee, and they have believed that thou
didst send me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 I pray for them: I pray not for
the world, but for them which thou
hast given me; for they are thine.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And all mine are thine, and
thine are mine; and I am glorified in
them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And now I am no more in the
world, but these are in the world, and
I come to thee. Holy Father, keep
through thine own name those whom
thou hast given me, that they may be
one, as we <hi rend='italic'>are</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 While I was with them in the
world, I kept them in thy name:
those that thou gavest me I have
kept, and none of them is lost, but
the son of perdition; that the scripture
might be fulfilled.<note place='foot'> Ps. xli. 9, and cix. 8, 17.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And now come I to thee, and
these things I speak in the world,
that they might have my joy fulfilled
in themselves.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 I have given them thy word;
and the world hath hated them, because
they are not of the world, even
as I am not of the world.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 I pray not that thou shouldest
take them out of the world, but that
thou shouldest keep them from the
evil.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 They are not of the world, even
as I am not of the world.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 Sanctify them through thy truth:
thy word is truth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 As thou hast sent me into the
world, even so have I also sent them
into the world.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 And for their sakes I sanctify
myself, that they also might be sanctified
through the truth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 Neither pray I for these alone;
but for them also which shall believe
on me through their word:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 That they all may be one; as
thou, Father, <hi rend='italic'>art</hi> in me, and I in thee,
that they also may be one in us: that
the world may believe that thou hast
sent me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And the glory which thou gavest
me, I have given them; that they may
be one, even as we are one;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 I in them, and thou in me, that
they may be made perfect in one; and
that the world may know that thou
hast sent me, and hast loved them as
thou hast loved me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 Father, I will that they also
whom thou hast given me be with me
where I am; that they may behold
my glory which thou hast given me:
for thou lovedst me before the foundation
of the world.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 O righteous Father, the world
hath not known thee: but I have
known thee, and these have known
that thou hast sent me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And I have declared unto them
thy name, and will declare <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>: that
the love wherewith thou hast loved
me, may be in them, and I in them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='442'/><anchor id='Pg442'/>

<div>
<head>§ 142. The agony in Gethsemane. (Evening
Introducing The Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVI. 30, 36-46.</cell><cell>CH. XIV. 26, 32-42.</cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And when they had sung a
hymn, they went out into the mount
of Olives.</cell><cell>26 And when they had sung an
hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives.</cell></row>
<row><cell>36 Then cometh Jesus with them
unto a place called Gethsemane, and
saith unto the disciples, Sit ye here,
while I go and pray yonder.</cell><cell>32 And they came to a place which
was named Gethsemane: and he saith
to his disciples, Sit ye here, while I
shall pray.</cell></row>
<row><cell>37 And he took with him Peter,
and the two sons of Zebedee, and
began to be sorrowful and very heavy.</cell><cell>33 And he taketh with him Peter,
and James, and John, and began to be
sore amazed, and to be very heavy;</cell></row>
<row><cell>38 Then saith he unto them, My
soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto
death: tarry ye here, and watch with
me.</cell><cell>34 And saith unto them, My soul
is exceeding sorrowful unto death:
tarry ye here, and watch.</cell></row>
<row><cell>39 And he went a little further,
and fell on his face, and prayed, saying,
O my Father, if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as
I will, but as thou <hi rend='italic'>wilt</hi>.</cell><cell>35 And he went forward a little,
and fell on the ground, and prayed
that, if it were possible, the hour
might pass from him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>36 And he said, Abba, Father, all
things <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> possible unto thee; take
away this cup from me: nevertheless,
not what I will, but what thou wilt.</cell></row>
<row><cell>40 And he cometh unto the disciples,
and findeth them asleep, and
saith unto Peter, What! could ye not
watch with me one hour?</cell><cell>37 And he cometh, and findeth
them sleeping, and saith unto Peter,
Simon, sleepest thou? couldest not
thou watch one hour?</cell></row>
<row><cell>41 Watch and pray, that ye enter
not into temptation: the spirit indeed
<hi rend='italic'>is</hi> willing, but the flesh <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> weak.</cell><cell>38 Watch ye and pray, lest ye
enter into temptation. The spirit truly
<hi rend='italic'>is</hi> ready, but the flesh <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> weak.</cell></row>
<row><cell>42 He went away again the second
time, and prayed, saying, O my
Father, if this cup may not pass away
from me, except I drink it, thy will
be done.</cell><cell>39 And again he went away, and
prayed, and spake the same words.</cell></row>
<row><cell>43 And he came and found them
asleep again: for their eyes were
heavy.</cell><cell>40 And when he returned, he found
them asleep again, (for their eyes
were heavy;) neither wist they what to answer him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>44 And he left them, and went
away again, and prayed the third
time, saying the same words.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 Then cometh he to his disciples,
and saith unto them, Sleep on now,
and take <hi rend='italic'>your</hi> rest: behold, the hour
is at hand, and the Son of man is betrayed
into the hands of sinners.</cell><cell>41 And he cometh the third time,
and saith unto them, Sleep on now,
and take <hi rend='italic'>your</hi> rest: it is enough, the
hour is come: behold, the Son of
man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.</cell></row>
<row><cell>46 Rise, let us be going: behold,
he is at hand that doth betray me.</cell><cell>42 Rise up, let us go; lo, he that
betrayeth me is at hand.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXII. 39-46.</cell><cell>CH. XVIII. 1.</cell></row>
<row><cell>39 And he came out, and went, as
he was wont, to the mount of Olives;
and his disciples also followed him.</cell><cell>When Jesus had spoken these
words, he went forth with his disciples
over the brook Cedron, where
was a garden, into which he entered,
and his disciples.</cell></row>
<row><cell>40 And when he was at the place,
he said unto them, Pray that ye enter
not into temptation.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 And he was withdrawn from
them about a stone's cast, and kneeled
down, and prayed,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 Saying, Father, if thou be
willing, remove this cup from me:
nevertheless, not my will, but thine,
be done.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 And there appeared an angel
unto him from heaven, strengthening
him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 And being in an agony, he
prayed more earnestly: and his sweat
was as it were great drops of blood<note place='foot'>The strangeness of such a profusion
of blood has been urged, first, against the probability, and then against the truth, of the
narrative. But learned men have related instances of mental agony so great as to force the
blood through the pores; and if this has ever occurred, it may well be believed to have
occurred in the present case. See <hi rend='italic'>Bloomfield</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>A. Clarke</hi>, in loc. It should be observed, however, that Luke does not directly affirm that it was blood. He only <emph>compares</emph>
the sweat to that of blood, using a term of similitude, (<hi rend='italic'>quasi</hi> grumi sanguinis&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Beza</hi>;
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>tanquam</foreign> demissiones sanguinis&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Tremellius</hi>; sicut guttæ sanguinis&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Vulg</hi>. and <hi rend='italic'>Molinaus</hi>;)
which may signify no more than that the drops of sweat were as large as drops of blood,
which, from its viscidity, are very large.</note>
falling down to the ground.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 And when he rose up from
prayer, and was come to his disciples,
he found them sleeping for sorrow,<note place='foot'>No other Evangelist mentions the cause of their
slumber, except Luke, who ascribes it to their sorrow. It is observable, that Luke was a
physician, (Col. iv. 14,) and therefore well knew that deep mental distress frequently induced
sleep. To this cause may perhaps be referred the fact, that persons condemned to die are
often waked from sound sleep by the executioner. The internal evidence here afforded of
the truth of Luke's narrative, is corroborated by his notice of the bloody sweat, ver. 44,
and of the miraculous healing of the ear of Malchus, ver. 51; facts which are not related by
any other Evangelist, but which would naturally attract the attention of a physician.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>46 And said unto them, Why sleep
ye? rise and pray, lest ye enter into
temptation.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='444'/><anchor id='Pg444'/>

<div>
<head>§ 143. Jesus betrayed and made prisoner. (Evening
Introducing The Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Mount of Olives</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVI. 47-56.</cell><cell>CH. XIV. 43-52</cell></row>
<row><cell>47 And while he yet spake, lo,
Judas, one of the twelve, came, and
with him a great multitude with
swords and staves, from the chief
priests and elders of the people.</cell><cell>43 And immediately while he yet
spake, cometh Judas, one of the
twelve, and with him a great multitude
with swords and staves, from the
chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders.</cell></row>
<row><cell>48 Now, he that betrayed him, gave
them a sign, saying, Whomsoever I
shall kiss, that same is he; hold him
fast.</cell><cell>44 And he that betrayed him, had
given them a token, saying, Whomsoever
I shall kiss, that same is he;
take him, and lead <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> away safely.</cell></row>
<row><cell>49 And forthwith he came to Jesus,
and said, Hail Master; and kissed him.</cell><cell>45 And as soon as he was come, he
goeth straightway to him, and saith,
Master, Master; and kissed him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>50 And Jesus said unto him, Friend,
wherefore art thou come? Then came
they, and laid hands on Jesus, and
took him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>51 And behold, one of them which
were with Jesus, stretched out <hi rend='italic'>his</hi>
hand, and drew his sword, and struck
a servant of the high priest, and smote
off his ear.</cell><cell>47 And one of them that stood by,
drew a sword, and smote a servant of
the high priest, and cut off his ear.</cell></row>
<row><cell>52 Then said Jesus unto him, Put
up again thy sword into his place:
for all they that take the sword, shall
perish with the sword.<note place='foot'> Gen. ix. 6.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>53 Thinkest thou that I cannot
now pray to my Father, and he shall
presently give me more than twelve
legions of angels?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>54 But how then shall the scriptures
be fulfilled, that thus it must be?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>55 In that same hour said Jesus to
the multitudes, Are ye come out as
against a thief with swords and staves
for to take me? I sat daily with you
teaching in the temple, and ye laid
no hold on me.</cell><cell>48 And Jesus answered and said
unto them, Are ye come out as against
a thief, with swords and <hi rend='italic'>with</hi> staves
to take me?</cell></row>
<row><cell>56 But all this was done, that the
scriptures of the prophets might be
fulfilled.</cell><cell>49 I was daily with you in the
temple, teaching, and ye took me not:
but the scriptures must be fulfilled.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Then all the disciples forsook
him, and fled.</cell><cell>50 And they all forsook him and
fled.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>51 And there followed him a certain
young man, having a linen cloth cast
about <hi rend='italic'>his naked body</hi>; and the young
men laid hold on him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>52 And he left the linen cloth, and
fled from them naked.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXII. 47-53.</cell><cell>CH. XVIII. 2-21.</cell></row>
<row><cell>47 And while he yet spake, behold
a multitude, and he that was called
Judas, one of the twelve, went before
them, and drew near unto Jesus to
kiss him.</cell><cell>2 And Judas also, which betrayed
him, knew the place: for Jesus ofttimes
resorted thither with his disciples.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>3 Judas then, having received a
band <hi rend='italic'>of men</hi> and officers from the
chief priests and Pharisees, cometh
thither with lanterns, and torches, and
weapons.</cell></row>
<row><cell>48 But Jesus said unto him, Judas,
betrayest thou the Son of man with a
kiss?</cell><cell>4 Jesus therefore, knowing all
things that should come upon him,
went forth, and said unto them, Whom
seek ye?</cell></row>
<row><cell>49 When they which were about
him, saw what would follow, they
said unto him, Lord, shall we smite
with the sword?</cell><cell>5 They answered him, Jesus of
Nazareth. Jesus saith unto them, I
am <hi rend='italic'>he</hi>.<note place='foot'>In the order of events, Jesus first voluntarily discriminates
himself; after which Judas gives the agreed sign to his enemies. Newcome.</note> And Judas also, which betrayed
him, stood with them.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>6 As soon then as he had said unto
them, I am <hi rend='italic'>he</hi>, they went backward,
and fell to the ground.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>7 Then asked he them again, Whom
seek ye? And they said, Jesus of
Nazareth.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>8 Jesus answered, I have told you
that I am <hi rend='italic'>he</hi>. If therefore ye seek
me, let these go their way:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>9 That the saying might be fulfilled
which he spake, Of them which
thou gavest me, have I lost none.</cell></row>
<row><cell>50 And one of them smote the servant
of the high priest, and cut off his
right ear.</cell><cell>10 Then Simon Peter,<note place='foot'>Lenfant and Bp. Pearce think that Peter was named
by John, because he was then dead; and that he was not named by the other Evangelists
because when they wrote he was living, and the action might have subjected him to
public justice, or at least to reproach. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note> having a
sword, drew it, and smote the high
priest's servant, and cut off his right
ear. The servant's name was Malchus.</cell></row>
<row><cell>51 And Jesus answered and said,
Suffer ye thus far. And he touched
his ear, and healed him.</cell><cell>11 Then said Jesus unto Peter,
Put up thy sword into the sheath:
the cup which my Father hath given
me, shall I not drink it?</cell></row>
<row><cell>52 Then Jesus said unto the chief
priests, and captains of the temple,
and the elders which were come to
him, Be ye come out as against a
thief with swords and staves?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>53 When I was daily with you in
the temple, ye stretched forth no hands
against me: but this is your hour, and
power of darkness.</cell><cell>12 Then the band, and the captain,
and officers of the Jews took Jesus, and bound him.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='446'/><anchor id='Pg446'/>

<div>
<head>§ 144. Jesus before Caiaphas. Peter thrice denies him. (Night
Introducing The Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVI. 57, 58, 69-75.</cell><cell>CH. XIV. 53, 54, 66-72.</cell></row>
<row><cell>57 And they that had laid hold on
Jesus, led <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> away to Caiaphas the
high priest, where the scribes and the
elders were assembled.</cell><cell>53 And they led Jesus away to the
high priest: and with him were assembled all the chief priests, and the
elders and the scribes.</cell></row>
<row><cell>58 But Peter followed him afar off,
unto the high priest's palace, and
went in, and sat with the servants to
see the end.</cell><cell>54 And Peter followed him afar off,
even into the palace of the high priest:
and he sat with the servants, and
warmed himself at the fire.</cell></row>
<row><cell>69 Now Peter sat without in the
palace: and a damsel came unto him,
saying, Thou also wast with Jesus of
Galilee.</cell><cell>66 And as Peter was beneath in
the palace, there cometh one of the
maids of the high priest:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>67 And when she saw Peter warming
himself, she looked upon him, and
said, And thou also wast with Jesus
of Nazareth.</cell></row>
<row><cell>70 But he denied before <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> all,
saying, I know not what thou sayest.</cell><cell>68 But he denied, saying, I know
not, neither understand I what thou
sayest. And he went out into the
porch; and the cock crew.</cell></row>
<row><cell>71 And when he was gone out into
the porch,<note place='foot'>Here is a minute indication of veracity, which would
have been lost upon us but for the narrative of John. Matthew only states the fact that
the maid in the porch recognized Peter as one of the disciples of Jesus; but John (xviii. 16,)
informs us how she knew him to be so; namely, because he was brought in by John, who
was a frequent guest at the house of her master the high priest. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Blunt</hi>, Veracity &amp;c.,
Sect. i. 12, 18.</note> another <hi rend='italic'>maid</hi> saw him, and
said unto them that were there, This
<hi rend='italic'>fellow</hi> was also with Jesus of Nazareth.</cell><cell>69 And a maid saw him again, and
began to say to them that stood by,
This is <hi rend='italic'>one</hi> of them.</cell></row>
<row><cell>72 And again he denied with an
oath, I do not know the man.</cell><cell>70 And he denied it again. And
a little after, they that stood by said
again to Peter, Surely thou art <hi rend='italic'>one</hi> of
them: for thou art a Galilean, and thy
speech agreeth <hi rend='italic'>thereto</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell>73 And after a while came unto
<hi rend='italic'>him</hi> they that stood by, and said to
Peter, Surely thou also art <hi rend='italic'>one</hi> of
them; for thy speech bewrayeth thee.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>74 Then began he to curse and to
swear, <hi rend='italic'>saying</hi>, I know not the man.
And immediately the cock crew.</cell><cell>71 But he began to curse and to
swear, <hi rend='italic'>saying</hi>, I know not this man
of whom ye speak.</cell></row>
<row><cell>75 And Peter remembered the word
of Jesus, which said unto him, Before
the cock crow thou shalt deny me
thrice. And he went out, and wept
bitterly.</cell><cell>72 And the second time the cock
crew. And Peter called to mind the
word that Jesus said unto him, Before
the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny
me thrice. And when he thought
thereon, he wept.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXII. 54-62.</cell><cell>CH. XVIII. 13-18, 25-27.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Then took they him, and led
<hi rend='italic'>him</hi> and brought him into the high
priest's house. And Peter followed
afar off.</cell><cell>13 And led him away to Annas
first,<note place='foot'>Probably by way of compliment to the past high
priest who was also the father-in-law of Caiaphas. If this circumstance never happened,
it is difficult to discover how the introduction of it could serve the purposes of fiction.
See Roberts, Light Shining, &amp;c. pp. 171, 172.</note> (for he was father-in-law to
Caiaphas, which was the high priest
that same year.)</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14 Now Caiaphas was he which
gave counsel to the Jews, that it was
expedient that one man should die for
the people.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15 And Simon Peter followed Jesus,
and <hi rend='italic'>so did</hi> another disciple. That
disciple was known unto the high
priest, and went in with Jesus, into the
palace of the high priest.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>16 But Peter stood at the door
without. Then went out that other
disciple which was known unto the
high priest, and spake unto her that
kept the door, and brought in Peter.</cell></row>
<row><cell>55 And when they had kindled a
fire in the midst of the hall, and were
set down together, Peter sat down
among them.</cell><cell>18 And the servants and officers
stood there, who had made a fire of
coals; (for it was cold) and they
warmed themselves: and Peter stood
with them, and warmed himself.</cell></row>
<row><cell>56 But a certain maid beheld him
as he sat by the fire, and earnestly
looked upon him, and said, This man
was also with him.</cell><cell>17 Then saith the damsel that kept
the door unto Peter, Art not thou also
<hi rend='italic'>one</hi> of this man's disciples? He saith,
I am not.</cell></row>
<row><cell>57 And he denied him, saying,
Woman, I know him not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>58 And after a little while another
saw him, and said, Thou art also of
them. And Peter said, Man, I am
not.</cell><cell>25 And Simon Peter stood and
warmed himself. They said therefore
unto him, Art not thou also <hi rend='italic'>one</hi> of his
disciples? He denied <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, and said, I
am not.</cell></row>
<row><cell>59 And about the space of one hour
after, another confidently affirmed,
saying, Of a truth this <hi rend='italic'>fellow</hi> also was
with him: for he is a Galilean.</cell><cell>26 One of the servants of the high
priest (being his kinsman whose ear
Peter cut off) saith, did not I see
thee in the garden with him?</cell></row>
<row><cell>60 And Peter said, Man, I know
not<note place='foot'>The seeming contradiction between Luke, who
relates that it <emph>was a man</emph> who charged Peter with being a follower of Jesus, and Matthew
and Mark who state that he was accused by <emph>a maid</emph>, is reconciled by attending to the narrative
of John, (xviii. 25,) who writes, <q><hi rend='italic'>They said</hi>.</q> Whence it appears that there were
several who spake on this occasion, and that each Evangelist refers to the accusation which
made the deepest impression on his own mind. See <hi rend='smallcaps'>Michaelis</hi> and Bp. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Middleton</hi>, cited
in 4 <hi rend='smallcaps'>Horne's</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Introd</hi>. p. 258, note 1.</note> what thou sayest. And immediately,
while he yet spake, the cock
crew.</cell><cell>27 Peter then denied again: and
immediately the cock crew.<note place='foot'><p>Matthew and Mark relate Peter's denials of Christ after his condemnation,
and the insults consequent upon it. It is plain that they happened while the High Priest
and council were sitting in judgment. But instances of recurring in this manner to what
had been omitted in its proper place are common in the Gospels; and in this place the
thread of the narration is preserved unbroken.
</p>
<p>
It having been expressly mentioned by each Evangelist, that Peter would <emph>thrice</emph> deny
Jesus, we may conclude that each has related the <emph>three</emph> denials which Jesus foretold.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Peter's first denial</hi>. Peter was <emph>without</emph>, or <emph>beneath</emph>, in the hall of Caiaphas's house.
Dr. Scott, on Matth. xxvi. 3, observes that <foreign rend='italic'>aule</foreign> signifies an house, (Luke xi. 21,) and that
emphatically it signifies the king's house, or palace. But in Luke xxii. 55, it seems to
signify a spacious apartment, probably the High Priest's judgment-hall. It was the place
in which Jesus stood before the High Priest, (Luke xxii. 61,) and had an <foreign rend='italic'>atrium</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>vestibulum</foreign>
at its entrance. This was an unfit place for the tribunal of the High Priest at
such an hour, (John xviii. 18.) Sir John Chardin says, <q>In the lower Asia the day is
always hot; and in the height of summer the nights are as cold as at Paris in the
month of March.</q> It remains therefore that we understand it of a spacious chamber, such
as Shaw mentions, Travels, 4to. pp. 207, 8.
</p>
<p>
Peter was not in the <emph>higher</emph> part, where Jesus stood before the High Priest; but
<emph>without</emph> that division of the hall, and in the <emph>lower</emph> part, with the servants and officers.
The damsel, who kept the door, had entered into the hall when she charged Peter.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Peter's second denial</hi>. Peter, having once denied Jesus, naturally retired from the
place where his accuser was, to the vestibule of the hall, (Matt. xxvi. 71); and it was the
time of the first cock-crowing, or soon after midnight. After remaining here a short time,
perhaps near an hour, another damsel sees him, and says to those who were standing by in
the vestibule, that he was one of them. Peter, to avoid this charge, withdraws into the
hall, and stands and warms himself, (John xviii. 25.) The damsel, and those to whom she
had spoken, follow him; the communication between the places being immediate. Here
a <emph>man</emph> enforces the charge of the damsel, according to Luke; and <emph>others</emph> urge it according
to John, (though by him the plural may be used for the singular,) and Peter denies Jesus
vehemently.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Peter's third denial</hi>. Peter was now in the hall. Observe Matt. xxvi. 75, and
Luke xxii. 62. He was also within sight of Jesus, though at such a distance from him
that Jesus could know what passed only in a supernatural way. About an hour after his
second denial, those who stood by founded a charge against him on his being a Galilean,
which, Luke says, one in particular strongly affirmed, (though here Matthew and Mark may
use the plural for the singular,) and which, according to John, was supported by one of
Malchus's relations. This occasioned a more vehement denial than before; and immediately
the cock crew the second time. The first denial may have been between our twelve and
one; and the second between our two and three. We must further observe, that Matt.
xxvi. 57, lays the scene of Peter's denials in the house of Caiaphas; whereas the transactions
of John xviii. 15-23 seem to have passed in the house of Annas. But John xviii. 24 is
here transposed to its regular place, with Le Clerc. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</p></note></cell></row>
<row><cell>61 And the Lord turned, and looked
upon Peter. And Peter remembered
the word of the Lord, how he had said
unto him, Before the cock crow, thou
shalt deny me thrice.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>62 And Peter went out and wept
bitterly.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='450'/><anchor id='Pg450'/>

<div>
<head>§ 145. Jesus before Caiaphas. He declares himself to be the
Christ, &amp;c. (Morning Of The Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVI. 59-68.</cell><cell>CH. XIV. 55-65.</cell></row>
<row><cell>59 Now the chief priests and elders,
and all the council, sought false
witness against Jesus, to put him to
death;</cell><cell>55 And the chief priests, and all
the council sought for witness against
Jesus to put him to death; and found none:</cell></row>
<row><cell>60 But found none: yea, though
many false witnesses came, <hi rend='italic'>yet</hi> found
they none. At the last came two false
witnesses,</cell><cell>56 For many bare false witness
against him, but their witness agreed
not together.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>57 And there arose certain, and
bare false witness against him, saying,</cell></row>
<row><cell>61 And said, This <hi rend='italic'>fellow</hi> said, I am
able to destroy the temple of God, and
to build it in three days.</cell><cell>58 We heard him say, I will destroy
this temple that is made with
hands, and within three days I will
build another made without hands.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>59 But neither so did their witness
agree together.</cell></row>
<row><cell>62 And the high priest arose, and
said unto him, Answerest thou nothing?
what <hi rend='italic'>is it which</hi> these witness
against thee?</cell><cell>60 And the high priest stood up in
the midst, and asked Jesus, saying,
Answerest thou nothing? what <hi rend='italic'>is it
which</hi> these witness against thee?</cell></row>
<row><cell>63 But Jesus held his peace. And
the high priest answered and said
unto him, I adjure thee by the living
God, that thou tell us whether thou
be the Christ, the Son of God.</cell><cell>61 But he held his peace, and answered
nothing. Again the high
priest asked him, and said unto him,
Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?</cell></row>
<row><cell>64 Jesus saith unto him, Thou hast
said: nevertheless, I say unto you,
Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man
sitting on the right hand of power,
and coming in the clouds of heaven.</cell><cell>62 And Jesus said, I am: and ye
shall see the Son of man sitting on
the right hand of power, and coming
in the clouds of heaven.</cell></row>
<row><cell>65 Then the high priest rent his
clothes, saying, He hath spoken blasphemy;
what further need have we of
witnesses? behold, now ye have heard
his blasphemy.</cell><cell>63 Then the high priest rent his
clothes, and saith, What need we any
further witnesses?</cell></row>
<row><cell>66 What think ye? They answered
and said, He is guilty of death.</cell><cell>64 Ye have heard the blasphemy:
what think ye? And they all condemned
him to be guilty of death.</cell></row>
<row><cell>67 Then did they spit in his face,
and buffeted him; and others smote
<hi rend='italic'>him</hi> with the palms of their hands,</cell><cell>65 And some began to spit on him,
and to cover his face, and to buffet
him, and to say unto him, Prophesy:
and the servants did strike him with
the palms of their hands.</cell></row>
<row><cell>68 Saying, Prophesy unto us,<note place='foot'>Matthew alone states this fact; and he states
nothing in explanation of it. The other Evangelists add another fact, which shows that
the Jews were quite consistent in asking him to designate who struck him, namely, that
they had previously <q>blindfolded him.</q> Now the omissions of particulars are characteristic
of one to whom it never occurs that they are wanted to make his statement credible, but
who, conscious of his own integrity, states his facts and leaves them to their fate; and they
cannot fairly be accounted for, upon any other supposition than the truth of the narrative.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Blunt</hi>, Veracity, &amp;c., <hi rend='italic'>sec</hi>. i. 10.</note> thou
Christ, Who is he that smote thee?</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXII. 63-71.</cell><cell>CH. XVIII. 19-24.</cell></row>
<row><cell>66 And as soon as it was day, the
elders of the people, and the chief
priests, and the scribes, came together,
and led him into their council, saying,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>67 Art thou the Christ? tell us.
And he said unto them, If I tell you,
ye will not believe.</cell><cell>19 The high priest then asked
Jesus of his disciples, and of his doctrine.</cell></row>
<row><cell>68 And if I also ask <hi rend='italic'>you</hi>, ye will
not answer me, nor let <hi rend='italic'>me</hi> go.</cell><cell>20 Jesus answered him, I spake
openly to the world; I ever taught
in the synagogue, and in the temple,
whither the Jews always resort; and
in secret have I said nothing.</cell></row>
<row><cell>69 Hereafter shall the Son of man
sit on the right hand of the power of
God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>70 Then said they all, Art thou
then the Son of God? And he said
unto them, Ye say that I am.</cell><cell>21 Why askest thou me? ask them
which heard me, what I have said
unto them: behold, they know what
I said.</cell></row>
<row><cell>71 And they said, What need we
any further witness? for we ourselves
have heard of his own mouth.</cell><cell>22 And when he had thus spoken,
one of the officers which stood by,
struck Jesus with the palm of his
hand, saying, Answerest thou the
high priest so?</cell></row>
<row><cell>63 And the men that held Jesus,
mocked him, and smote <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>64 And when they had blindfolded
him, they struck him on the face, and
asked him, saying, Prophesy, who is
it that smote thee?</cell><cell>23 Jesus answered him, If I have
spoken evil, bear witness of the evil:
but if well, why smitest thou me?</cell></row>
<row><cell>65 And many other things blasphemously
spake they against him.</cell><cell>24 (Now Annas had sent him bound
unto Caiaphas the high priest.)</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='452'/><anchor id='Pg452'/>

<div>
<head>§ 146. The Sanhedrim lead Jesus away to Pilate.
(Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVII. 1, 2, 11-14.</cell><cell>CH. XV. 1-5.</cell></row>
<row><cell>When the morning was come, all
the chief priests and elders of the
people took counsel against Jesus to
put him to death.</cell><cell>And straightway in the morning
the chief priests held a consultation
with the elders and scribes, and the
whole council, and bound Jesus, and
carried <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> away, and delivered <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>
to Pilate.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And when they had bound him,
they led <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> away, and delivered him
to Pontius Pilate the governor.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And Jesus stood before the governor:
and the governor asked him,
saying, Art thou the King of the Jews?
And Jesus said unto him, Thou sayest.</cell><cell>2 And Pilate asked him, Art thou
the King of the Jews? And he answering,
said unto him, Thou sayest it.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And when he was accused of
the chief priests and elders, he answered
nothing.</cell><cell>3 And the chief priests accused
him of many things: but he answered nothing.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13 Then saith Pilate unto him,
Hearest thou not how many things
they witness against thee?</cell><cell>4 And Pilate asked him again, saying,
Answerest thou nothing? behold
how many things they witness against thee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And he answered him to never
a word; insomuch that the governor
marvelled greatly.</cell><cell>5 But Jesus yet answered nothing:
so that Pilate marvelled.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXIII. 1-5.</cell><cell>CH. XVIII. 28-38.</cell></row>
<row><cell>And the whole multitude of them
arose, and led him unto Pilate.</cell><cell>28 Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas
unto the hall of judgment: and
it was early; and they themselves went
not into the judgment-hall, lest they
should be defiled; but that they might
eat the passover.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And they began to accuse him,
saying, We found this <hi rend='italic'>fellow</hi> perverting
the nation, and forbidding to give
tribute to Cesar, saying, That he himself
is Christ, a King.</cell><cell>29 Pilate then went out unto them,
and said, What accusation bring ye
against this man?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>30 They answered and said unto
him, If he were not a malefactor, we
would not have delivered him up unto
thee.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31 Then said Pilate unto them,
Take ye him, and judge him according
to your law. The Jews therefore said
unto him, It is not lawful for us to put
any man to death:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>32 That the saying of Jesus might
be fulfilled, which he spake, signifying
what death he should die.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And Pilate asked him saying,
Art thou the King of the Jews? And
he answered him and said, Thou
sayest <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>.</cell><cell>33 Then Pilate entered into the
judgment-hall again, and called Jesus,
and said unto him, Art thou the King
of the Jews?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>34 Jesus answered him, Sayest
thou this thing of thyself, or did others
tell it thee of me?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35 Pilate answered, Am I a Jew?
Thine own nation, and the chief
priests, have delivered thee unto me.
What hast thou done?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>36 Jesus answered, My kingdom is
not of this world: if my kingdom were
of this world, then would my servants
fight,<note place='foot'>Jesus seems here almost to have challenged
inquiry into the assault so lately committed by Peter upon the servant of the high
priest. St. Luke, however, states a fact which accounts for their not making such inquiry,
ch. xxii. 51. <hi rend='italic'>He touched his ear and healed him</hi>. An inquiry into the truth would have
frustrated the malicious purpose of the enemies of Jesus, by proving his own compassionate
nature, his submission to the laws, and his miraculous powers. Blunt, Veracity, &amp;c.,
sect. i. 19.</note> that I should not be delivered to
the Jews: but now is my kingdom
not from hence.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>37 Pilate therefore said unto him,
Art thou a king then? Jesus answered,
Thou sayest that I am a king. To
this end was I born, and for this
cause came I into the world, that I
should bear witness unto the truth.
Every one that is of the truth, heareth
my voice.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4 Then said Pilate to the chief
priests, and <hi rend='italic'>to</hi> the people, I find no
fault in this man.</cell><cell>38 Pilate saith unto him, What is
truth? And when he had said this,
he went out again unto the Jews, and
saith them, I find in him no fault
<hi rend='italic'>at all</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And they were the more fierce,
saying, He stirreth up the people,
teaching throughout all Jewry, beginning
from Galilee to this place.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='454'/><anchor id='Pg454'/>

<div>
<head>§ 147. Jesus before Herod.
(Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXIII. 6-12.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 When Pilate heard of Galilee,
he asked whether the man were a
Galilean.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And as soon as he knew that he
belonged unto Herod's jurisdiction, he
sent him to Herod, who himself was
also at Jerusalem at that time.<note place='foot'>Here is an obscure intimation that
neither Pilate nor Herod were residents of Jerusalem; and the manner of the insinuation
deserves notice, as a mark of conscious veracity in the narrator. Now it appears from
Josephus, that this Herod was the very opposite of his successor, Herod Agrippa; the
former being partial to the Greeks, and a hater of the Jews; while the latter so loved the
Jews that he took pleasure in constantly dwelling at Jerusalem. It is therefore evident
that Herod's presence at Jerusalem at this time was merely casual; as that of Pilate
certainly was, the Roman governors residing at Cæsarea. See Josephus, Ant. xviii. iv. §
1.-xix. vii. § 3.-xx. iv. § 4. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Blunt</hi>, Veracity, &amp;c., sect. II. 11.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And when Herod saw Jesus,
he was exceeding glad: for he was
desirous to see him of a long <hi rend='italic'>season</hi>,
because he had heard many things of
him; and he hoped to have seen some
miracle done by him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 Then he questioned with him in
many words; but he answered him
nothing.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And the chief priests and scribes
stood and vehemently accused him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And Herod with his men of war
set him at nought, and mocked <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>,
and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe,
and sent him again to Pilate.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And the same day Pilate and
Herod were made friends together;
for before they were at enmity between
themselves.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='456'/><anchor id='Pg456'/>

<div>
<head>§ 148. Pilate seeks to release Jesus. The Jews demand
Barabbas. (Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVII. 15-26.</cell><cell>CH. XV. 6-15.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15 Now at <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> feast, the governor
was wont to release unto the people a
prisoner, whom they would.</cell><cell>6 Now at <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> feast he released
unto them one prisoner, whomsoever
they desired.</cell></row>
<row><cell>16 And they had then a notable
prisoner, called Barabbas.</cell><cell>7 And there was <hi rend='italic'>one</hi> named Barabbas,
<hi rend='italic'>which lay</hi> bound with them that
had made insurrection with him, who
had committed murder in the insurrection.</cell></row>
<row><cell>17 Therefore, when they were gathered
together, Pilate said unto them,
Whom will ye that I release unto you?
Barabbas, or Jesus, which is called
Christ?</cell><cell>8 And the multitude crying aloud,
began to desire <hi rend='italic'>him to do</hi> as he had
ever done unto them.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>9 But Pilate answered them, saying,
Will ye that I release unto you the
King of the Jews?</cell></row>
<row><cell>18 (For he knew that for envy they
had delivered him.)</cell><cell>10 (For he knew that the chief
priests had delivered him for envy.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 When he was set down on the
judgment-seat, his wife sent unto him,
saying, Have thou nothing to do with
that just man: for I have suffered
many things this day in a dream,
because of him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 But the chief priests and elders
persuaded the multitude that they
should ask Barabbas, and destroy Jesus.</cell><cell>11 But the chief priests moved the
people that he should rather release
Barabbas unto them.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21 The governor answered and said
unto them, Whether of the twain, will
ye that I release unto you? They said,
Barabbas.</cell><cell>12 And Pilate answered, and said
again unto them, What will ye then,
that I shall do <hi rend='italic'>unto him</hi> whom ye call
the King of the Jews?</cell></row>
<row><cell>22 Pilate saith unto them, What
shall I do then with Jesus, which is
called Christ? <hi rend='italic'>They</hi> all say unto him,
Let him be crucified.</cell><cell>13 And they cried out again, Crucify him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And the governor said, Why!
what evil hath he done? But they
cried out the more, saying, Let him
be crucified.</cell><cell>14 Then Pilate said unto them,
Why, what evil hath he done? And
they cried out the more exceedingly,
Crucify him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>24 When Pilate saw that he could
prevail nothing, but <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> rather a tumult
was made, he took water, and
washed <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> hands before the multitude,
saying, I am innocent of the blood of
this just person: see ye <hi rend='italic'>to it</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 Then answered all the people,
and said, His blood <hi rend='italic'>be</hi> on us, and on
our children.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 Then released he Barabbas unto
them:</cell><cell>15 And <hi rend='italic'>so</hi> Pilate, willing to content
the people, released Barabbas unto them.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXIII. 13-25.</cell><cell>CH. XVIII. 39, 40.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And Pilate, when he had called
together the chief priests, and the
rulers, and the people,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 Said unto them, Ye have brought
this man unto me, as one that perverteth
the people: and behold, I,
having examined <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> before you, have
found no fault in this man, touching
those things whereof ye accuse him;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 No, nor yet Herod: for I sent
you to him; and lo, nothing worthy
of death is done unto him:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 I will therefore chastise him, and
release <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>.</cell><cell>39 But ye have a custom that I
should release unto you one at the
passover: will ye therefore, that I release
unto you the king of the Jews?</cell></row>
<row><cell>17 (For of necessity he must release
one unto them at the feast.)</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 And they cried out all at once,
saying, Away with this <hi rend='italic'>man</hi>, and release
unto us Barabbas:</cell><cell>40 Then cried they all again, saying,
Not this man, but Barabbas. Now
Barabbas was a robber.</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 (Who, for a certain sedition
made in the city, and for murder, was
cast into prison.)</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 Pilate therefore, willing to release
Jesus, spake again unto them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>21 But they cried, saying, Crucify
<hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, crucify him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>22 And he said unto them the third
time, Why, what evil hath he done?
I have found no cause of death in
him; I will therefore chastise him,
and let <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> go.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>23 And they were instant with loud
voices, requiring that he might be crucified:
and the voices of them, and of
the chief priests prevailed.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 And Pilate gave sentence<note place='foot'>The accuracy of Luke, as a man of education, is
observable in this statement of the formal judgment pronounced by Pilate, which is
only implied in the narratives of the other Evangelists.</note> that it
should be as they required.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And he released unto them him
that for sedition and murder was cast
into prison, whom they had desired;
but he delivered Jesus to their will.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='458'/><anchor id='Pg458'/>

<div>
<head>§ 149. Pilate delivers up Jesus to death. He is scourged
and mocked. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVII. 26-30.</cell><cell>CH. XV. 15-19.</cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And when he had scourged
Jesus, he delivered <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> to be crucified.</cell><cell>15 And delivered Jesus, when
he had scourged <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, to be crucified.</cell></row>
<row><cell>27 Then the soldiers of the governor
took Jesus into the common hall,
and gathered unto him the whole band
<hi rend='italic'>of soldiers</hi>.</cell><cell>16 And the soldiers led him away
into the hall, called Pretorium; and
they call together the whole band;</cell></row>
<row><cell>28 And they stripped him, and put
on him a scarlet robe.</cell><cell>17 And they clothed him with purple,
and platted a crown of thorns,
and put it about his <hi rend='italic'>head</hi>,</cell></row>
<row><cell>29 And when they had platted a
crown of thorns, they put <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> upon his
head, and a reed in his right hand:
and they bowed the knee before him,
and mocked him, saying, Hail, King
of the Jews!</cell><cell>18 And began to salute him, Hail,
King of the Jews!</cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And they spit upon him, and
took the reed, and smote him on the
head.</cell><cell>19 And they smote him on the
head with a reed, and did spit upon
him, and bowing <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> knees, worshipped him.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIX. 1-3.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Then Pilate therefore took Jesus
and scourged <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And the soldiers platted a crown
of thorns, and put <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> on his head, and
they put on him a purple robe,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And said, Hail, King of the
Jews! and they smote him with their
hands.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 150. Pilate again seeks to release Jesus.
(Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIX. 4-16.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 Pilate therefore went forth again,
and saith unto them, Behold, I bring
him forth to you, that ye may know
that I find no fault in him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 Then came Jesus forth, wearing
the crown of thorns, and the purple
robe. And <hi rend='italic'>Pilate</hi> saith unto them,
Behold the man!</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 When the chief priests therefore
and officers saw him, they cried out,
saying, Crucify <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, crucify <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>.
Pilate saith unto them, Take ye him,
and crucify <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>: for I find no fault in
him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 The Jews answered him, We
have a law, and by our law he ought
to die, because he made himself the
Son of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 When Pilate therefore heard that
saying, he was the more afraid;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And went again into the judgment-hall,
and saith unto Jesus, Whence
art thou? But Jesus gave him no
answer.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 Then saith Pilate unto him,
Speakest thou not unto me? knowest
thou not, that I have power to crucify
thee, and have power to release
thee?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 Jesus answered, Thou couldest
have no power <hi rend='italic'>at all</hi> against me, except
it were given thee from above:
therefore he that delivered me unto
thee hath the greater sin.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And from thenceforth Pilate
sought to release him; but the Jews
cried out, saying, If thou let this
man go, thou art not Cesar's friend.
Whosoever maketh himself a king,
speaketh against Cesar.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 When Pilate therefore heard
that saying, he brought Jesus forth,
and sat down in the judgment-seat, in
a place that is called the Pavement,
but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And it was the preparation of
the passover, and about the sixth
hour:<note place='foot'>The apparent contradiction between John and Mark,
(ch. xv. 25,) who mentions the third hour, is reconciled by Dr. Campbell, in a critical note
upon the force of the expressions in the original, which he interprets as equivalent to saying,
in the one case, that it was past <emph>three</emph>, and in the other, that it was <emph>towards six</emph>. See
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Campbell</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>in loc</hi>.</note> and he saith unto the Jews,
Behold your King!</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 But they cried out, Away with
<hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, away with <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, crucify him.
Pilate saith unto them, shall I crucify
your King? The chief priests
answered, We have no king but
Cesar.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 Then delivered he him therefore
unto them to be crucified.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='460'/><anchor id='Pg460'/>

<div>
<head>§ 151. Judas repents, and hangs himself.
(Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVII. 3-10.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 Then Judas, which had betrayed
him, when he saw that he was condemned,
repented himself, and brought
again the thirty pieces of silver to the
chief priests and elders,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 Saying, I have sinned in that I
have betrayed the innocent blood.
And they said, What <hi rend='italic'>is that</hi> to us?
see thou <hi rend='italic'>to that</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And he cast down the pieces of
silver in the temple, and departed, and
went and hanged himself.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 And the chief priests took the
silver pieces, and said, It is not lawful
for to put them into the treasury, because
it is the price of blood.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And they took counsel, and bought
with them the potter's field, to bury
strangers in.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 Wherefore that field was called,
The field of blood, unto this day.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 Then was fulfilled that which was
spoken by Jeremy<note place='foot'>The passage here quoted is found in the prophecy of Zechariah,
and not in Jeremiah. Dr. Lightfoot says, that anciently among the Jews the Old
Testament was divided into three parts. The first, beginning with the law, was called <hi rend='italic'>The
Law</hi>. The second, beginning with Psalms, was called <hi rend='italic'>The Psalms</hi>. The third, beginning
with the prophecy of Jeremiah, which anciently stood first, was called <hi rend='italic'>Jeremiah</hi>, under
which name all quotations from the prophets were made. See <hi rend='smallcaps'>A. Clarke</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>in loc.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jennings</hi>,
Jewish Antiq. pp. 594, 595. Others account for the apparent error in Matthew's
quotation, by supposing that he omitted the name of the prophet, as he frequently did in
his citations of scripture, and that the name of Jeremiah was inserted by a subsequent
copyist. 1 <hi rend='smallcaps'>Horne's</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Introd</hi>. p. 582.</note> the prophet, saying,
And they took the thirty pieces of
silver, the price of him that was valued,
whom they of the children of Israel
did value;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 And gave them for the potter's
field, as the Lord appointed me.<note place='foot'>Zech. xi. 12, seq.  Jer. xxxii. 6, seq.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='462'/><anchor id='Pg462'/>

<div>
<head>§ 152. Jesus is led away to be crucified.
(Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVII. 31-34.</cell><cell>CH. XV. 20-23.</cell></row>
<row><cell>31 And after that they had mocked
him, they took the robe off from him,
and put his own raiment on him, and
led him away to crucify <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>.</cell><cell>20 And when they had mocked him,
they took off the purple from him, and
put his own clothes on him, and led
him out to crucify him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>32 And as they came out, they
found a man of Cyrene, Simon by
name: him they compelled to bear
his cross.</cell><cell>21 And they compel one Simon a
Cyrenian, who passed by, coming out
of the country, the father of Alexander
and Rufus,<note place='foot'>Clement of Alexandria and Jerome both relate that Mark
wrote this Gospel at <emph>Rome</emph>, and we find in Romans xiv. 13, that a disciple named Rufus,
of considerable note, resided in that city. Admitting that both Mark and Paul speak of
the same person, which is highly probable, as they refer to the same period of time and to
a disciple of distinction, there is an evident consciousness of veracity in the Evangelist, in
making this reference to Rufus, then living among them, since he could not but have
known the particulars of the crucifixion, in which his own father was so intimately concerned.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Blunt's</hi> Veracity, &amp;c., sect. i. 14. See also <hi rend='smallcaps'>Eusebius</hi>, lib. 2, ch. 15.</note> to bear his cross.</cell></row>
<row><cell>33 And when they were come unto
a place called Golgotha, that is to say,
A place of a skull,</cell><cell>22 And they bring him unto the
place Golgotha, which is, being interpreted,
The place of a skull.</cell></row>
<row><cell>34 They gave him vinegar to drink,
mingled with gall: and when he had
tasted <hi rend='italic'>thereof</hi>, he would not drink.</cell><cell>23 And they gave him to drink,
wine mingled with myrrh: but he
received <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> not.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXIII. 26-33.</cell><cell>CH. XIX. 16-17.</cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And as they led him away, they
laid hold upon one Simon a Cyrenian,
coming out of the country, and on him
they laid the cross, that he might bear
<hi rend='italic'>it</hi> after Jesus.</cell><cell>16 And
they took Jesus, and led <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> away.</cell></row>
<row><cell>27 And there followed him a great
company of people, and of women,
which also bewailed and lamented
him.</cell><cell>17 And he bearing his cross</cell></row>
<row><cell>28 But Jesus turning unto them,
said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep
not for me, but weep for yourselves,
and for your children.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 For behold, the days are coming,
in the which they shall say, Blessed
<hi rend='italic'>are</hi> the barren, and the wombs that
never bare, and the paps which never
gave suck.<note place='foot'>Is. liv. 1.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 Then shall they begin to say to
the mountains, Fall on us; and to the
hills, Cover us.<note place='foot'>Hos. x. 8.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 For if they do these things in a
green tree, what shall be done in the
dry?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>32 And there were also two others,
malefactors, led with him to be put to
death.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>33 And when they were come to the
place which is called Calvary,</cell><cell>went
forth into a place called <hi rend='italic'>the place</hi> of a
skull, which is called in the Hebrew, Golgotha.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='464'/><anchor id='Pg464'/>

<div>
<head>§ 153. The Crucifixion.
(Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVII. 35-38.</cell><cell>CH. XV. 24-28.</cell></row>
<row><cell>35 And they crucified him, and
parted his garments, casting lots:
that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by the prophet; They parted
my garments among them, and upon
my vesture did they cast lots.<note place='foot'>Ps. xxii. 19.</note></cell><cell>24 And when they had crucified
him, they parted his garments, casting
lots upon them, what every man
should take.</cell></row>
<row><cell>36 And sitting down, they watched
him there:</cell><cell>25 And it was the third hour, and
they crucified him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>37 And set up over his head his
accusation<note place='foot'><p>As to the title itself, the precise working may have
differed in the different languages; and MSS. represent it differently.
</p>
<p>
But the same verbal exactness is not necessary in historians, whose aim is religious
instruction, as in recorders of public inscriptions. It is enough that the Evangelists agree
as to the main article, <q><hi rend='italic'>the King of the Jews</hi>,</q> referred to, John xix. 21. That their
manner is to regard the sense, rather than the words, appears from many places. Compare
Matt. iii. 17, and ix. 11, and xv. 27, and xvi. 6, 9, and xix. 18, and xx. 33, and xxi. 9,
and xxvi. 39, 64, 70, and xxviii. 5, 6, with the parallel verses in this Harmony. Compare
also John xi. 40, with ver. 23, 25. One of the most solemn and awful of our Lord's discourses
is, in some parts, variously expressed. See Matt. xxvi. 28, Mark xiv. 24, Luke
xxii. 20, 1 Cor. xi. 25. Now as each of these writers has, beyond all doubt, faithfully
represented the meaning of Christ, we see that it might be truly done in different words,
or in a different form of the same words. His sentences also, sometimes admitted a difference of arrangement; for the order in which two sentences, or the several members of
the same sentence, are disposed by St. Matthew, is, in several places, inverted by St. Mark.
And with regard to his actions, though the most material parts of whatever they were going
to relate must command their attention, yet there was no such superior attraction in one
specific number and order of secondary circumstances, as could turn their thoughts absolutely
and exclusively to them. This is plain from instances to the contrary. One Evangelist
is sometimes distinct, while another is concise; and describes what the other passes over.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Townson</hi>, pp. 60-1.
</p>
<p>
We may reasonably suppose St. Matthew to have cited the Hebrew,&mdash;St. John the
Greek,&mdash;and St. Mark the Latin, which was the shortest, and without mixture of foreign
words. St. Mark is followed by St. Luke; only that he has brought down <q>THIS IS</q>
from above, as having a common reference to what stood under it. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</p></note> written, THIS IS JESUS
THE KING OF THE JEWS.</cell><cell>26 And the superscription of his
accusation was written over, THE
KING OF THE JEWS.</cell></row>
<row><cell>38 Then were there two thieves
crucified with him: one on the right
hand, and another on the left.</cell><cell>27 And with him they crucify two
thieves, the one on his right hand,
and the other on his left.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>28 And the scripture was fulfilled,
which saith, And he was numbered
with the transgressors.<note place='foot'>Is. liii. 12.</note></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXIII. 33, 34, 38.</cell><cell>CH. XIX. 18-24.</cell></row>
<row><cell>33 There
they crucified him, and the malefactors;
one on the right hand, and the other
on the left.</cell><cell>18 Where they crucified him, and
two other with him, on either side
one, and Jesus in the midst.</cell></row>
<row><cell>34 Then said Jesus, Father, forgive
them: for they know not what they
do. And they parted his raiment, and
cast lots.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 And a superscription also was
written over him, in letters of Greek,
and Latin, and Hebrew, THIS IS
THE KING OF THE JEWS.</cell><cell>19 And Pilate wrote a title, and put
it on the cross. And the writing was,
JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE
KING OF THE JEWS.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20 This title then read many of
Jews: for the place where Jesus was
crucified was nigh to the city: and it
was written in Hebrew, <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> Greek,
<hi rend='italic'>and</hi> Latin.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21 Then said the chief priests of
the Jews to Pilate, Write not, The
King of the Jews; but that he said, I
am King of the Jews.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22 Pilate answered, What I have
written, I have written.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>23 Then the soldiers, when they
had crucified Jesus, took his garments,
and made four parts,<note place='foot'>We have here an incidental allusion to a practice well known
at that time. The malefactor about to be crucified, having borne his own cross to the
place of execution, was stripped, and made to drink a stupefying potion; the cross was then
laid on the ground, the sufferer distended upon it, and four soldiers, two on each side, were
employed in driving four large nails through his hands and feet. For this service they had a
right to his clothes as a perquisite. See Dr. Harwood's Introd., cited in Horne's <hi rend='italic'>Introd</hi>.,
vol. i. pp. 94, 95.</note> to every soldier
a part; and also <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> coat: now the
coat was without seam, woven from
the top throughout.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>24 They said therefore among themselves,
Let us not rend it, but cast lots
for it whose it shall be: that the scripture
might be fulfilled, which saith,
They parted my raiment among them,
and for my vesture they did cast lots.
These things therefore the soldiers
did.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='466'/><anchor id='Pg466'/>

<div>
<head>§ 154. The Jews mock at Jesus on the cross. He commends
his mother to John. (Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVII. 39-44.</cell><cell>CH. XV. 29-32.</cell></row>
<row><cell>39 And they that passed by, reviled
him, wagging their heads,</cell><cell>29 And they that passed by, railed
on him, wagging their heads, and
saying, Ah, thou that destroyest the
temple, and buildest <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> in three days,</cell></row>
<row><cell>40 And saying, Thou that destroyest
the temple, and buildest <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> in
three days, save thyself. If thou be
the Son of God, come down from the
cross.</cell><cell>30 Save thyself, and come down
from the cross.</cell></row>
<row><cell>41 Likewise also the chief priests
mocking <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, with the scribes and
elders, said,</cell><cell>31 Likewise also the chief priests
mocking, said among themselves with
the scribes, He saved others; himself
he cannot save.</cell></row>
<row><cell>42 He saved others; himself he
cannot save. If he be the King of
Israel, let him now come down from
the cross, and we will believe him.</cell><cell>32 Let Christ the King of Israel
descend now from the cross, that we
may see and believe. And they that
were crucified with him, reviled him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>43 He trusted in God; let him deliver
him now if he will have him: for
he said, I am the Son of God.<note place='foot'>Ps. xxii. 7, 8.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 The thieves also which were
crucified with him, cast the same in
his teeth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXIII. 35-37, 39-43.</cell><cell>CH. XIX. 25-27.</cell></row>
<row><cell>35 And the people stood beholding.
And the rulers also with them derided
him, saying, He saved others; let
him save himself, if he be Christ, the
chosen of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>36 And the soldiers also mocked
him, coming to him, and offering him
vinegar,<note place='foot'>Here the common drink of the Roman soldiers is offered by
them to Jesus on the cross, while they are deriding him; which is a different act from that
in Matt. xxvii. 34, 48, as appears by the place assigned to it. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi></note></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>37 And saying, If thou be the King
of the Jews, save thyself.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 And one of the malefactors,<note place='foot'>What was true of only one of the malefactors
is attributed to both in the concise relations of Matthew and Mark; the plural being
often used in the Gospels for the singular. This the Evangelists themselves show in
some instances. Compare Mark vii. 17, and Matt. xv. 15; Mark v. 31, and Luke viii.
45; Matt. xiv. 17, and Mark vi. 38, Luke ix. 13, John vi. 8, 9; Matt. xxvi. 8, and
Mark xiv. 4, John xii. 4; Matt. xxiv. 1, and Mark xiii. 1; Matt. xxvii. 37, and John
xix. 19; Matt. xxvii. 48, and Mark xv. 36, John xix. 29. See also Luke xxii. 67.
In the following places, the plural is used, while the sense shows that one is spoken of.
John xi. 8, Luke xx. 21, 39, and xxiv. 5, Matt. xv. 1, 12.&mdash;The Evangelists, therefore,
when from attention to brevity they avoid particularizing, often attribute to many what
is said or done by single persons; nor does any striking peculiarity in the case omitted, lead
them to deviate from their manner; for instance, the case of Judas, Matth. xxvi. 8, and
the parallel places. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi></note>
which were hanged, railed on him,
saying, If thou be Christ, save thyself
and us.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>40 But the other answering, rebuked
him, saying, Dost not thou fear
God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 And we indeed justly; for we
receive the due reward of our deeds:
but this man hath done nothing amiss.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 And he said unto Jesus, Lord,
remember me when thou comest into
thy kingdom.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 And Jesus said unto him, Verily,
I say unto thee, To-day shalt thou be
with me in paradise.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>25 Now there stood by the cross
of Jesus, his mother, and his mother's
sister, Mary the <hi rend='italic'>wife</hi> of Cleophas, and
Mary Magdalene.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>26 When Jesus therefore saw his
mother, and the disciple standing by
whom he loved, he saith unto his
mother, Woman, behold thy son!</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>27 Then saith he to the disciple,
Behold thy mother! And from that
hour that disciple took her unto his
own <hi rend='italic'>home</hi>.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='468'/><anchor id='Pg468'/>

<div>
<head>§ 155. Darkness prevails. Christ expires on the cross.
(Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVII. 45-50.</cell><cell>CH. XV. 33-37.</cell></row>
<row><cell>45 Now, from the sixth hour there
was darkness over all the land unto
the ninth hour.</cell><cell>33 And when the sixth hour was
come, there was darkness over the
whole land, until the ninth hour.</cell></row>
<row><cell>46 And about the ninth hour Jesus
cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli,
Eli, lama sabachthani? that is to say,
My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken
me?<note place='foot'>Ps. xxii. 1.</note></cell><cell>34 And at the ninth hour Jesus
cried with a loud voice, saying, Eloi,
Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, being
interpreted, My God, my God,
why hast thou forsaken me?</cell></row>
<row><cell>47 Some of them that stood there,
when they heard <hi rend='italic'>that</hi>, said, This <hi rend='italic'>man</hi>
calleth for Elias.</cell><cell>35 And some of them that stood
by, when they heard <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, said, Behold,
he calleth Elias.</cell></row>
<row><cell>48 And straightway one of them
ran, and took a spunge, and filled <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>
with vinegar,<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Hil</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Hila</foreign> was the old Syriac for <hi rend='italic'>vinegar</hi>. Hence one
of the bystanders, hearing our Saviour's exclamation on the cross, thought he wanted
vinegar to alleviate his thirst, and straightway filled a spunge. See <hi rend='smallcaps'>Buchanan's</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Researches</hi>,
p. 153.</note> and put <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> on a reed,
and gave him to drink.</cell><cell>36 And one ran and filled a spunge
full of vinegar, and put <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> on a reed,
and gave him to drink, saying, Let
alone; let us see whether Elias will
come to take him down.</cell></row>
<row><cell>49 The rest said, Let be, let us
see whether Elias<note place='foot'>The Jews gave a literal interpretation to Mal. iv. 5, expecting
Elijah to appear in person, as the forerunner of the Messiah; and hence they, on this occasion,
sneeringly adverted to the want of this testimony to the mission of Christ. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jones</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Lect</hi>. 147. This incidental allusion to the popular opinion, by Matthew and Mark, may
be noticed as additional evidence of their veracity.</note> will come to save
him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>50 Jesus, when he had cried again
with a loud voice, yielded up the
ghost.</cell><cell>37 And Jesus cried with a loud
voice, and gave up the ghost.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXIII. 44-46.</cell><cell>CH. XIX. 28-30.</cell></row>
<row><cell>44 And it was about the sixth
hour, and there was a darkness over
all the earth<note place='foot'>The objection urged by infidels, upon this passage,
against the veracity of the Evangelists, from the silence of profane writers concerning so
remarkable an event, is met and answered by Bp. Watson in his Reply to Gibbon, Let. 5.
See also <hi rend='smallcaps'>Horne's</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Introd</hi>. Vol. 1. p. 210-216. The word translated <hi rend='italic'>earth</hi>, in Luke, is
the same which is rendered <hi rend='italic'>land</hi>, in the others, and applies equally to both. Taken in the
latter sense, it may limit the darkness to Judea. But the Evangelists do not mention the
degree of darkness; if therefore it was slight, though it extended over the whole globe, the
objection of its not being recorded by Pliny or Seneca vanishes at once.</note> until the ninth hour.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 And the sun was darkened,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>28 After this, Jesus knowing that
all things were now accomplished,
that the scripture might be fulfilled,
saith, I thirst.<note place='foot'>Ps. lxix. 22.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>29 Now there was set a vessel full
of vinegar: and they filled a spunge
with vinegar, and put <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> upon hyssop,
and put <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> to his mouth.</cell></row>
<row><cell>46 And when Jesus had cried with
a loud voice, he said, Father, into
thy hands I commend my spirit: and
having said thus, he gave up the ghost.</cell><cell>30 When Jesus therefore had received
the vinegar, he said, It is
finished: and he bowed his head, and
gave up the ghost.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='470'/><anchor id='Pg470'/>

<div>
<head>§ 156. The vail of the Temple rent. The graves opened.
The women at the cross. (Sixth Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVII. 51-56.</cell><cell>CH. XV. 38-41.</cell></row>
<row><cell>51 And behold, the vail of the temple
was rent in twain from the top to
the bottom: and the earth did quake,
and the rocks rent;</cell><cell>38 And the vail of the temple was
rent in twain, from the top to the bottom.</cell></row>
<row><cell>52 And the graves were opened,
and many bodies of the saints which
slept, arose,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>53 And came out of the graves
after his resurrection, and went into
the holy city, and appeared unto
many.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>54 Now, when the centurion, and
they that were with him, watching
Jesus, saw the earthquake, and those
things that were done, they feared
greatly, saying, Truly this was the
Son of God.</cell><cell>39 And when the centurion which
stood over against him, saw that he so
cried out, and gave up the ghost, he
said, Truly this man was the Son of God.</cell></row>
<row><cell>55 And many women were there
(beholding afar off)<note place='foot'>This and the parallel verses are reconciled with John
xix. 25, by the following observation in Wall's critical notes, p. 116. <q>Mary stood
as yet, (John xix. 25,) so nigh the cross as to hear what Christ said. But at the time
of his departure, Matthew, Mark and Luke say, the women stood afar off.</q> See also
Watson's Reply to Gibbon, Let. 5, (Evangelical Family Library, Vol. xiv. pp. 276,
277.) It is natural to suppose that our Lord's relations and friends, mentioned in
John xix. 25, were too much struck with commiseration and grief to remain long
near the cross; and that they would retire from the horror of the concluding scene.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note> which followed
Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto
him:</cell><cell>40 There were also women looking
on afar off, among whom was Mary
Magdalene, and Mary the Mother of
James the less, and of Joses, and
Salome;</cell></row>
<row><cell>56 Among which was Mary Magdalene,
and Mary the mother of James
and Joses, and the mother of Zebedee's
children.</cell><cell>41 Who also, when he was in Galilee,
followed him, and ministered unto
him; and many other women which
came up with him unto Jerusalem.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXIII. 45, 47-49.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>45 And the vail of the temple
was rent in the midst.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>47 Now, when the centurion saw
what was done, he glorified God,
saying, Certainly this was a righteous
man.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>48 And all the people that came
together to that sight, beholding the
things which were done, smote their
breasts and returned.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>49 And all his acquaintance, and
the women that followed him from
Galilee, stood afar off, beholding these
things.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='472'/><anchor id='Pg472'/>

<div>
<head>§ 157. The taking down from the cross.
The burial. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVII. 57-61.</cell><cell>CH. XV. 42-47.</cell></row>
<row><cell>57 When the even was come, there
came a rich man of Arimathea, named
Joseph, who also himself was Jesus'
disciple:</cell><cell>42 And now, when the even was
come, (because it was the preparation,
that is, the day before the sabbath,)</cell></row>
<row><cell>58 He went to Pilate, and begged
the body<note place='foot'>Here is another of those incidental allusions to
existing customs, which show the naturalness and veracity of the narrative. Those who
were crucified by the Romans are said to have been usually exposed to the birds of prey;
and a guard was set to prevent their friends from burying the bodies. The body of Jesus
therefore could not be obtained for burial, without leave from Pilate; which the Evangelists
relate was applied for, but without explaining the cause.</note> of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded
the body to be delivered.</cell><cell>43 Joseph of Arimathea, an honourable
counsellor, which also waited
for the kingdom of God, came, and
went in boldly unto Pilate, and craved
the body of Jesus.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>44 And Pilate marvelled if he were
already dead: and calling <hi rend='italic'>unto him</hi>
the centurion, he asked him whether
he had been any while dead.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>45 And when he knew <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> of the
centurion, he gave the body to Joseph.</cell></row>
<row><cell>59 And when Joseph had taken the
body, he wrapped it in a clean linen
cloth,</cell><cell>46 And he bought fine linen, and
took him down, and wrapped him in
the linen, and laid him in a sepulchre
which was hewn out of a rock, and
rolled a stone unto the door of the
sepulchre.</cell></row>
<row><cell>60 And laid it in his own new
tomb, which he had hewn out in the
rock; and he rolled a great stone
to the door of the sepulchre, and departed.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>61 And there was Mary Magdalene,
and the other Mary, sitting over
against the sepulchre.</cell><cell>47 And Mary Magdalene and Mary
<hi rend='italic'>the mother</hi> of Joses beheld where he
was laid.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXIII. 50-56.</cell><cell>CH. XIX. 31-42.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31 The Jews therefore, because it
was the preparation, that the bodies
should not remain upon the cross on
the sabbath-day, (for that sabbath-day
was an high day) besought Pilate that
their legs might be broken, and <hi rend='italic'>that</hi>
they might be taken away.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>32 Then came the soldiers, and
brake the legs of the first, and of the
other which was crucified with him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>33 But when they came to Jesus,
and saw that he was dead already,
they brake not his legs:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>34 But one of the soldiers with a
spear pierced his side, and forthwith
came thereout blood and water.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35 And he that saw <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, bare record,
and his record is true: and he knoweth
that he saith true, that ye might
believe.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>36 For these things were done, that
the scripture should be fulfilled, A bone
of him shall not be broken.<note place='foot'>Ex. xxii. 46. Ps. xxiv. 20.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>37 And again another scripture
saith, They shall look on him whom
they pierced.<note place='foot'>Zech. xii. 10.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell>50 And behold, <hi rend='italic'>there was</hi> a man
named Joseph, a counsellor: <hi rend='italic'>and he
was</hi> a good man, and a just:</cell><cell>38 And after this Joseph of Arimathea
(being a disciple of Jesus, but
secretly for fear of the Jews) besought
Pilate that he might take away the
body of Jesus: and Pilate gave <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>
leave. He came therefore and took
the body of Jesus.</cell></row>
<row><cell>51 (The same had not consented
to the counsel and deed of them:)
<hi rend='italic'>he was</hi> of Arimathea, a city of the
Jews; who also himself waited for
the kingdom of God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>52 This <hi rend='italic'>man</hi> went unto Pilate, and
begged the body of Jesus.</cell><cell>39 And there came also Nicodemus
(which at the first came to Jesus by
night) and brought a mixture of myrrh
and aloes, about an hundred pounds weight.</cell></row>
<row><cell>53 And he took it down, and
wrapped it in linen, and laid it in a
sepulchre that was hewn in stone,
wherein never man before was laid.</cell><cell>40 Then took they the body of
Jesus, and wound it in linen clothes
with the spices, as the manner of the
Jews is to bury.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>41 Now in the place where he was
crucified, there was a garden; and in
the garden a new sepulchre, wherein
was never man yet laid.</cell></row>
<row><cell>54 And that day was the preparation,
and the sabbath drew on.<note place='foot'>We must not understand this word of the morning light.
The Jewish sabbath began at six in the morning, before which time our Lord's body was
deposited in the tomb. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>.</note></cell><cell>42 There laid they Jesus therefore,
because of the Jews' preparation-<hi rend='italic'>day</hi>;
for the sepulchre was nigh at
hand.</cell></row>
<row><cell>55 And the women also, which
came with him from Galilee, followed
after, and beheld the sepulchre, and
how his body was laid.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>56 And they returned, and prepared
spices and ointments; and rested the
sabbath-day, according to the commandment.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='474'/><anchor id='Pg474'/>

<div>
<head>§ 158. The watch at the sepulchre. (Seventh
Day Of The Week, Or Sabbath.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVII. 62-66.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>62 Now, the next day that followed
the day of the preparation, the chief
priests and Pharisees came together
unto Pilate,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>63 Saying, Sir, we remember that
that deceiver said, while he was yet
alive, After three days I will rise
again.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>64 Command therefore that the
sepulchre be made sure until the third
day, lest his disciples come by night,
and steal him away, and say unto the
people, He is risen from the dead: so
the last error shall be worse than the
first.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>65 Pilate said unto them, Ye have
a watch: go your way, make <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> as
sure as ye can.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>66 So they went and made the
sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, and
setting a watch.<note place='foot'>The mention of this circumstance by Matthew,
and not by the other Evangelists, is in perfect keeping with his previous occupation;
which led him to watch for fraud, in all places where it might be perpetrated.</note></cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='477'/><anchor id='Pg477'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part IX. Our Lord's Resurrection, His Subsequent Appearances,
And His Ascension.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Time.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Forty days</hi>.
</p>

<pb n='478'/><anchor id='Pg478'/>

<div>
<head>§ 159. The morning of the Resurrection.
(First Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVIII. 2-4.</cell><cell>CH. XVI. 1.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>And when the sabbath was past,
Mary Magdalene, and Mary the <hi rend='italic'>mother</hi>
of James, and Salome, had bought
sweet spices, that they might come
and anoint him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And behold, there was a great
earthquake; for the angel of the Lord
descended from heaven, and came and
rolled back the stone from the door,
and sat upon it.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 His countenance was like lightning,
and his raiment white as snow.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And for fear of him the keepers
did shake, and became as dead <hi rend='italic'>men</hi>.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 160. Visit of the women to the Sepulchre. Mary
Magdalene returns. (First Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVIII. 1.</cell><cell>CH. XVI. 2-4.</cell></row>
<row><cell>In the end of the sabbath, as it began
to dawn toward the first <hi rend='italic'>day</hi> of
the week, came Mary Magdalene, and
the other Mary to see the sepulchre.</cell><cell>2 And very early in the morning,
the first <hi rend='italic'>day</hi> of the week, they came
unto the sepulchre at the rising of the sun:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>3 And they said among themselves,
Who shall roll us away the stone from
the door of the sepulchre?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>4 (And when they looked, they saw
that the stone was rolled away,) for it
was very great.</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXIV. 1-3.</cell><cell>CH. XX. 1-2.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Now upon the first <hi rend='italic'>day</hi> of the
week, very early in the morning, they
came unto the sepulchre, bringing the
spices which they had prepared, and
certain <hi rend='italic'>others</hi> with them.</cell><cell>The first <hi rend='italic'>day</hi> of the week cometh
Mary Magdalene early, when it was
yet dark, unto the sepulchre, and
seeth the stone taken away from the
sepulchre.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 And they found the stone rolled
away from the sepulchre.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3 And they entered in, and found
not the body of the Lord Jesus.</cell><cell>2 Then she runneth, and cometh
to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple
whom Jesus loved, and saith
unto them, They have taken away
the Lord out of the sepulchre, and we
know not where they have laid him.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 161. Vision of angels in the Sepulchre.
(First Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVIII. 5-7.</cell><cell>CH. XVI. 5-7.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5 And entering into the sepulchre,
they saw a young man sitting on the
right side, clothed in a long white
garment; and they were affrighted.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And the angel answered and said
unto the women, Fear not ye: for I
know that ye seek Jesus, which was
crucified.</cell><cell>6 And he saith unto them, Be not
affrighted: ye seek Jesus of Nazareth,
which was crucified: he is risen; he
is not here; behold the place where
they laid him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6 He is not here: for he is risen,
as he said. Come, see the place
where the Lord lay.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 And go quickly, and tell his disciples,
that he is risen from the dead,
and behold, he goeth before you into
Galilee; there shall ye see him: lo, I
have told you.</cell><cell>7 But go your way, tell his disciples
and Peter, that he goeth before
you into Galilee: there shall ye see
him, as he said unto you.</cell></row>

</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXIV. 4-8.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4 And it came to pass, as they
were much perplexed thereabout, behold,
two men stood by them in shining
garments.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5 And as they were afraid, and
bowed down <hi rend='italic'>their</hi> faces to the earth,
they said unto them, Why seek ye
the living among the dead?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6 He is not here, but is risen. Remember
how he spake unto you when
he was yet in Galilee,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7 Saying, The Son of man must be
delivered into the hands of sinful men,
and be crucified, and the third day rise
again.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And they remembered his words,</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='480'/><anchor id='Pg480'/>

<div>
<head>§ 162. The women return to the city. Jesus meets them.
(First Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVIII. 8-10.</cell><cell>CH. XVI. 8.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8 And they departed quickly from
the sepulchre, with fear and great
joy; and did run to bring his disciples
word.</cell><cell>6 And they went out quickly and
fled from the sepulchre; for they
trembled, and were amazed: neither
said they any thing to any <hi rend='italic'>man</hi>; for
they were afraid.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And as they went to tell his disciples,
behold Jesus met them, saying,
All hail. And they came, and
held him by the feet, and worshipped
him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 Then said Jesus unto them, Be
not afraid: go tell my brethren, that
they go into Galilee, and there shall
they see me.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXIV. 9-11.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9 And returned from the sepulchre,
and told all these things unto the
eleven, and to all the rest.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10 It was Mary Magdalene, and
Joanna, and Mary <hi rend='italic'>the mother</hi> of James,
and other <hi rend='italic'>women that were</hi> with them,
which told these things unto the apostles.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 And their words seemed to them
as idle tales, and they believed them
not.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 163. Peter and John run to the Sepulchre.
(First Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXIV. 12.</cell><cell>CH. XX. 3-10.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 Then arose Peter, and ran unto
the sepulchre, and stooping down, he
beheld the linen clothes laid by themselves,
and departed, wondering in
himself at that which was come to
pass.</cell><cell>3 Peter therefore went forth, and
that other disciple, and came to the
sepulchre.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>4 So they ran both together: and
the other disciple did outrun Peter,
and came first to the sepulchre.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5 And he stooping down, <hi rend='italic'>and looking
in</hi>, saw the linen clothes lying;
yet went he not in.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>6 Then cometh Simon Peter following
him, and went into the sepulchre,
and seeth the linen clothes lie;</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>7 And the napkin that was about
his head, not lying with the linen
clothes, but wrapped together in a
place by itself.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>8 Then went in also that other disciple
which came first to the sepulchre,
and he saw, and believed.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>9 For as yet they knew not the
scripture, that he must rise again from
the dead.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>10 Then the disciples went away
again unto their own home.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 164. Our Lord is seen by Mary Magdalene at the
Sepulchre. (First Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell>Mark.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XX. 11-18.</cell><cell>CH. XVI. 9-11.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11 But Mary stood without at the
sepulchre weeping: and as she wept
she stooped down <hi rend='italic'>and looked</hi> into
the sepulchre,</cell><cell>9 Now, when <hi rend='italic'>Jesus</hi> was risen early,
the first <hi rend='italic'>day</hi> of the week, he appeared
first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom
he had cast seven devils.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And seeth two angels in white,
sitting, the one at the head, and the
other at the feet, where the body of
Jesus had lain.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And they say unto her, Woman,
why weepest thou? She saith unto
them, Because they have taken away
my Lord, and I know not where they
have laid him.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And when she had thus said,
she turned herself back, and saw Jesus
standing, and knew not that it was
Jesus.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 Jesus saith unto her, Woman,
why weepest thou? whom seekest
thou? She, supposing him to be the
gardener, saith unto him, Sir, if thou
have borne him hence, tell me where
thou hast laid him, and I will take him
away.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 Jesus saith unto her, Mary.
She turned herself, and saith unto him,
Rabboni, which is to say, Master.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 Jesus saith unto her, Touch me
not: for I am not yet ascended to my
Father: but go to my brethren, and say
unto them, I ascend unto my Father
and your Father, and <hi rend='italic'>to</hi> my God and
your God.</cell><cell>10 <hi rend='italic'>And</hi> she went and told them that
had been with him, as they mourned
and wept.</cell></row>
<row><cell>18 Mary Magdalene came and told
the disciples that she had seen the
Lord, and <hi rend='italic'>that</hi> he had spoken these
things unto her.</cell><cell>11 And they, when they had heard
that he was alive, and had been seen
of her, believed not.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='482'/><anchor id='Pg482'/>

<div>
<head>§ 165. Report of the watch.
(First Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVIII. 11-15.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>11 Now, when they were going,
behold, some of the watch came into
the city, and shewed unto the chief
priests all the things that were done.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>12 And when they were assembled
with the elders, and had taken counsel,
they gave large money unto the
soldiers,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>13 Saying, Say ye, His disciples
came by night, and stole him <hi rend='italic'>away</hi>
while we slept.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 And if this come to the governor's
ears, we will persuade him,
and secure you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 So they took the money, and
did as they were taught: and this
saying is commonly reported among
the Jews until this day.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='484'/><anchor id='Pg484'/>

<div>
<head>§ 166. Our Lord is seen of Peter; then by two disciples on the
way to Emmaus. (First Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Emmaus</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Mark.</cell><cell>Luke.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVI. 12, 13.</cell><cell>CH. XXIV. 13-35.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12 After that, he appeared in another
form unto two of them, as they
walked, and went into the country.</cell><cell>13 And behold, two of them went
that same day to a village called
Emmaus, which was from Jerusalem
<hi rend='italic'>about</hi> threescore furlongs.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14 And they talked together of all
these things which had happened.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15 And it came to pass, that, while
they communed <hi rend='italic'>together</hi>, and reasoned,
Jesus himself drew near, and went
with them.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>16 But their eyes were holden, that
they should not know him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17 And he said unto them, What
manner of communications <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> these
that ye have one to another, as ye
walk, and are sad?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18 And the one of them, whose
name was Cleopas, answering, said
unto him, Art thou only a stranger
in Jerusalem, and hast not known the
things which are come to pass there
in these days?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>19 And he said unto them, What
things? And they said unto him, Concerning
Jesus of Nazareth, which was
a prophet mighty in deed and word
before God, and all the people:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20 And how the chief priests and
our rulers delivered him to be condemned
to death, and have crucified
him.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21 But we trusted that it had been
he which should have redeemed Israel:
and besides all this, to-day is the
third day since these things were
done.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22 Yea, and certain women also of
our company made us astonished,
which were early at the sepulchre.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>23 And when they found not his
body, they came, saying, that they
had also seen a vision of angels, which
said that he was alive.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>24 And certain of them which were
with us, went to the sepulchre, and
found <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> even so as the women had
said: but him they saw not.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>25 Then he said unto them, O fools,
and slow of heart to believe all that
the prophets have spoken!</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>26 Ought not Christ to have suffered
these things, and to enter into
his glory?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>27 And beginning at Moses, and
all the prophets, he expounded unto
them in all the scriptures the things
concerning himself.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>28 And they drew nigh unto the
village whither they went: and he
made as though he would have gone
further.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>29 But they constrained him, saying,
Abide with us: for it is toward
evening, and the day is far spent.
And he went in to tarry with them.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>30 And it came to pass, as he sat
at meat with them, he took bread,
and blessed <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, and brake, and gave to
them.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>31 And their eyes were opened,
and they knew him: and he vanished
out of their sight.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>32 And they said one to another,
Did not our heart burn within us
while he talked with us by the way,
and while he opened to us the scriptures?</cell></row>
<row><cell>13 And they went and told <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> unto
the residue: neither believed they them.</cell><cell>33 And they rose up the same hour,
and returned to Jerusalem, and found
the eleven gathered together, and
them that were with them,</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>34 Saying, The Lord is risen indeed,
and hath appeared to Simon.<note place='foot'>This appearance of Jesus is not alluded to
by any other Evangelist; but it was a fact well known among the disciples, and is
expressly stated by Paul, in 1 Cor. xv. 5,&mdash;<q>and that he was seen of Cephas, then of the
twelve.</q></note></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>35 And they told what things <hi rend='italic'>were
done</hi> in the way, and how he was
known of them in breaking of bread.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='486'/><anchor id='Pg486'/>

<div>
<head>§ 167. Jesus appears in the midst of the Apostles, Thomas being absent.
(Evening Following The First Day Of The Week.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Mark.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVI. 14-18.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>14 Afterward he appeared unto
the eleven,<note place='foot'>This appearance of Jesus is also affirmed by Paul, in
1 Cor. xv. 5.</note> as they sat at meat, and
upbraided them with their unbelief,
and hardness of heart, because they
believed not them which had seen
him after he was risen.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>15 And he said unto them, Go ye
into all the world, and preach the
gospel to every creature.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 He that believeth and is baptized,
shall be saved; but he that
believeth not, shall be damned.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And these signs shall follow
them that believe: In my name shall
they cast out devils; they shall speak
with new tongues:</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 They shall take up serpents;
and if they drink any deadly thing,
it shall not hurt them; they shall
lay hands on the sick, and they shall
recover.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Luke.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XIV. 36-49.</cell><cell>CH. XX. 19-23.</cell></row>
<row><cell>36 And as they thus spake, Jesus
himself stood in the midst of them,
and saith unto them, Peace <hi rend='italic'>be</hi> unto
you.</cell><cell>19 Then the same day at evening,
being the first <hi rend='italic'>day</hi> of the week, when
the doors were shut where the disciples
were assembled for fear of the
Jews, came Jesus and stood in the
midst, and saith unto them, Peace <hi rend='italic'>be</hi>
unto you.</cell></row>
<row><cell>37 But they were terrified and affrighted,
and supposed that they had
seen a spirit.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>38 And he said unto them, Why are
ye troubled? and why do thoughts
arise in your hearts?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>39 Behold my hands and my feet,
that it is I myself: handle me, and
see; for a spirit hath not flesh and
bones, as ye see me have.</cell><cell>20 And when he had so said, he
shewed unto them <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> hands and his
side. Then were the disciples glad
when they saw the Lord.</cell></row>
<row><cell>40 And when he had thus spoken,
he shewed them <hi rend='italic'>his</hi> hands and <hi rend='italic'>his</hi>
feet.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>41 And while they yet believed not
for joy, and wondered, he said unto
them, Have ye here any meat?</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>42 And they gave him a piece of
a broiled fish, and of an honey-comb.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>43 And he took <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>, and did eat
before them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>44 And he said unto them, These
<hi rend='italic'>are</hi> the words which I spake unto you,
while I was yet with you, that all
things must be fulfilled which were
written in the law of Moses, and <hi rend='italic'>in</hi>
the prophets, and <hi rend='italic'>in</hi> the psalms, concerning
me.</cell><cell>21 Then said Jesus to them again,
Peace <hi rend='italic'>be</hi> unto you: <hi rend='italic'>as my</hi> Father hath
sent me, even so send I you.</cell></row>
<row><cell>45 Then opened he their understanding,
that they might understand
the scriptures,</cell><cell>22 And when he had said this, he
breathed on <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>, and saith unto them,
Receive ye the Holy Ghost.</cell></row>
<row><cell>46 And said unto them, Thus it is
written, and thus it behoved Christ to
suffer, and to rise from the dead the
third day:</cell><cell>23 Whose soever sins ye remit,
they are remitted unto them; <hi rend='italic'>and</hi>
whose soever <hi rend='italic'>sins</hi> ye retain, they are
retained.</cell></row>
<row><cell>47 And that repentance and remission
of sins should be preached in his
name among all nations, beginning at
Jerusalem.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>48 And ye are witnesses of these
things.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>49 And behold, I send the promise
of my Father upon you: but tarry ye
in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be
endued with power from on high.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='488'/><anchor id='Pg488'/>

<div>
<head>§ 168. Jesus appears in the midst of the Apostles, Thomas being present.
(Evening Following First Day Of Week After Resurrection.) <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XX. 24-29.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>24 But Thomas, one of the twelve,
called Didymus, was not with them
when Jesus came.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 The other disciples therefore
said unto him, We have seen the
Lord. But he said unto them, Except
I shall see in his hands the print of the
nails, and put my finger into the print
of the nails, and thrust my hand into
his side, I will not believe.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>26 And after eight days again his
disciples were within, and Thomas
with them: <hi rend='italic'>then</hi> came Jesus, the doors
being shut, and stood in the midst, and
said, Peace <hi rend='italic'>be</hi> unto you.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>27 Then saith he to Thomas, Reach
hither thy finger, and behold my
hands; and reach hither thy hand,
and thrust <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> into my side; and be not
faithless, but believing.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>28 And Thomas answered and said
unto him, My Lord and my God.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>29 Jesus saith unto him, Thomas,
because thou hast seen me, thou hast
believed: blessed <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> they that have
not seen and <hi rend='italic'>yet</hi> have believed.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='490'/><anchor id='Pg490'/>

<div>
<head>§ 169. The Apostles go away into Galilee. Jesus shows
himself to seven of them at the Sea of Tiberias. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell>John.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVIII. 16.</cell><cell>CH. XXI. 1-24.</cell></row>
<row><cell>16 Then the eleven disciples went
away into Galilee,</cell><cell>After these things Jesus shewed
himself again to the disciples at the
sea of Tiberias; and on this wise
shewed he <hi rend='italic'>himself</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>2 There were together Simon Peter,
and Thomas called Didymus, and Nathanael
of Cana in Galilee, and the
<hi rend='italic'>sons</hi> of Zebedee, and two other of his
disciples.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>3 Simon Peter saith unto them, I
go a fishing. They say unto him,
We also go with thee. They went
forth, and entered into a ship immediately;
and that night they caught
nothing.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>4 But when the morning was now
come, Jesus stood on the shore; but
the disciples knew not that it was
Jesus.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>5 Then Jesus saith unto them,
Children, have ye any meat? They
answered him, No.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>6 And he said unto them, Cast the
net on the right side of the ship, and
ye shall find. They cast therefore,
and now they were not able to draw
it for the multitude of fishes.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>7 Therefore that disciple whom
Jesus loved saith unto Peter, It is the
Lord. Now when Simon Peter heard
that it was the Lord, he girt <hi rend='italic'>his</hi>
fisher's coat <hi rend='italic'>unto him</hi>, (for he was
naked) and did cast himself into the
sea.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>8 And the other disciples came in
a little ship (for they were not far
from land, but as it were two hundred
cubits) dragging the net with fishes.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>9 As soon then as they were come
to land, they saw a fire of coals there,
and fish laid thereon, and bread.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>10 Jesus saith unto them, bring of
the fish which ye have now caught.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>11 Simon Peter went up, and drew
the net to land full of great fishes, an
hundred and fifty and three: and for
all there were so many, yet was not
the net broken.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>12 Jesus saith unto them, Come
<hi rend='italic'>and</hi> dine. And none of the disciples
durst ask him, Who art thou? knowing
that it was the Lord.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>13 Jesus then cometh, and taketh
bread, and giveth them, and fish likewise.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>14 This is now the third time that
Jesus shewed himself to his disciples,
after that he was risen from the dead.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>15 So when they had dined, Jesus
saith to Simon Peter, Simon, <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of
Jonas, lovest thou me more than
these? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord:
thou knowest that I love thee. He
saith unto him, Feed my lambs.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>16 He saith to him again the
second time, Simon, <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Jonas,
lovest thou me? He saith unto him,
Yea, Lord: thou knowest that I love
thee. He saith unto him, Feed my
sheep.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>17 He saith unto him the third
time, Simon, <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of Jonas, lovest thou
me? Peter was grieved because he
said unto him the third time, Lovest
thou me? And he said unto him,
Lord, thou knowest all things; thou
knowest that I love thee. Jesus saith
unto him, Feed my sheep.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>18 Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
When thou wast young, thou girdest
thyself, and walkedst whither thou
wouldest: but when thou shalt be
old, thou shalt stretch forth thy
hands, and another shall gird thee,
and carry <hi rend='italic'>thee</hi> whither thou wouldest
not.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>19 This spake he, signifying by
what death he should glorify God.
And when he had spoken this, he
saith unto him, Follow me.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>20 Then Peter, turning about, seeth
the disciple whom Jesus loved, following;
(which also leaned on his breast
at supper, and said, Lord, which is he
that betrayeth thee?)</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>21 Peter seeing him, saith to Jesus,
Lord, and what <hi rend='italic'>shall</hi> this man <hi rend='italic'>do</hi>?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>22 Jesus saith unto him, if I will
that he tarry till I come, what <hi rend='italic'>is that</hi>
to thee? Follow thou me.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>23 Then went this saying abroad
among the brethren, that that disciple
should not die: yet Jesus said not
unto him, He shall not die; but, if I
will that he tarry till I come, what
<hi rend='italic'>is that</hi> to thee?</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>24 This is the disciple which testifieth
of these things, and wrote these
things: and we know that his testimony
is true.</cell></row>

</table>

</div>

<pb n='494'/><anchor id='Pg494'/>

<div>
<head>§ 170. Jesus meets the Apostles and above five hundred
brethren on a mountain in Galilee. <hi rend='italic'>Galilee</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Matthew.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXVIII. 16-20.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>16 into a
mountain where Jesus had appointed
them.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>17 And when they saw him,<note place='foot'>Many and perhaps most Harmonists and Commentators
refer 1 Cor. xv. 6, to this place, where it is related that Jesus was seen of above
five hundred brethren at once. Such is the opinion of Dr. Robinson and Bishop J. B.
Sumner, and such seems to have been the opinion of Abp. Newcome, Dr. Macknight, and
Dr. Pilkington. See <hi rend='smallcaps'>Newcome</hi>, in loc. The fact is deemed by some to have an important
bearing upon the extent of the commission then given or repeated by our Lord; but the
plan of this work does not require any further notice of the question.</note> they
worshipped him: but some doubted.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>18 And Jesus came, and spake unto
them, saying, All power is given unto
me in heaven and in earth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>19 Go ye therefore and teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost;</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>20 Teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded
you: and lo, I am with you alway,
<hi rend='italic'>even</hi> unto the end of the world.
Amen.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='496'/><anchor id='Pg496'/>

<div>
<head>§ 171. Our Lord is seen of James;
then of all the Apostles. <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>.</head>

<p>
The title of this section in inserted, for the sake of preserving the series of
Dr. Robinson, whose arrangement has been followed in this Harmony; but as
the appearances of Jesus which are here referred to, are related only by Luke in
Acts, i. 3-8, and by Paul in 1 Cor. xv. 7, the particular insertion of those passages
is omitted, for the reasons already given. See § 137, note. The subject of this and
the eleven preceding sections, respecting the resurrection of Jesus, is discussed in the
Note on the Resurrection.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 172. The Ascension.
<hi rend='italic'>Bethany</hi>.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Mark.</cell><cell>Luke.</cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XVI. 19, 20.</cell><cell>CH. XXIV. 50-53.</cell></row>
<row><cell>19 So then, after the Lord had
spoken unto them, he was received
up into heaven, and sat on the right
hand of God.</cell><cell>50 And he led them out as far as
to Bethany:<note place='foot'>This is perfectly consistent with the statement of Luke
in Acts i. 12, as Bethany was not only the name of a town, but of a district of Mount
Olivet, adjoining the town. See Watson's Reply to Gibbon, Letter vi. in Evangelical
Family Library, Vol. xiv., p. 277.</note> and he lifted up his
hands, and blessed them.</cell></row>
<row><cell>20 And they went forth, and
preached every where, the Lord working
with <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>, and confirming the
word with signs following. Amen.</cell><cell>51 And it came to pass, while he
blessed them, he was parted from
them, and carried up into heaven.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>52 And they worshipped him, and
returned to Jerusalem with great joy:</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>53 And were continually in the
temple, praising and blessing God.
Amen.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ 173. Conclusion of John's Gospel.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>John.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XX. 30, 31.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>30 And many other signs truly did
Jesus in the presence of his disciples,
which are not written in this book.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>31 But these are written that ye
might believe that Jesus is the Christ,
the Son of God; and that believing ye
might have life through his name.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>CH. XXI. 25.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>25 And there are also many other
things which Jesus did, the which, if
they should be written every one, I
suppose that even the world itself
could not contain the books that should
be written. Amen.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='498'/><anchor id='Pg498'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Note On The Resurrection.</head>

<p>
The accounts of the Resurrection and of the subsequent appearances of our Lord, have
been harmonised in various methods; of which the latest, and probably the best, is that
of Professor Robinson, in an article published in the Bibliotheca Sacra for February 1845,
vol. ii. pp. 162-189. As the best service the present writer could do to the English
reader, he has therefore here abridged that article, by omitting the introduction, and such
parts as relate to the Greek text, and a few other passages, which it seemed might be
spared without injury to the narrative itself.
</p>

<p>
§ 1. <hi rend='italic'>The Time of the Resurrection.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Matt. 26: 1, 2.  Mark 16: 1, 2, 9.  Luke 24: 1.  John 20: 1.
</p>

<p>
That the resurrection of our Lord took place before full daylight, on the first day of the
week, follows from the unanimous testimony of the Evangelists respecting the visit of the
women to the sepulchre. But the exact time at which he rose is nowhere specified.
According to the Jewish mode of reckoning, the Sabbath ended and the next day began
at sunset; so that had the resurrection occurred even before midnight, it would still have
been upon the first day of the week, and the third day after our Lord's burial. The
earthquake had taken place and the stone had been rolled away before the arrival of the
women; and so far as the immediate narrative is concerned, there is nothing to show that
all this might not have happened some hours earlier. Yet the words of Mark in another
place render it certain, that there could have been no great interval between these events
and the arrival of the women; since he affirms in v. 9, that Jesus <q>had risen <emph>early</emph>, the
first day of the week;</q> while in v. 2, he states that the women went out <q><emph>very early</emph>.</q>
A like inference may be drawn from the fact, that the affrighted guards first went to inform
the chief priests of these events, when the women returned to the city (Matt. 28: 11);
for it is hardly to be supposed, that after having been thus terrified by the earthquake and
the appearance of an angel, they would have waited any very long time before sending
information to their employers.&mdash;The body of Jesus had therefore probably lain in the
tomb not less than about thirty-six hours.
</p>

<p>
§ 2. <hi rend='italic'>The Visit of the Women to the Sepulchre.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Matt. 28: 1-8. Mark 16: 1-8. Luke 24: 1-11. John 20: 1, 2.
</p>

<p>
The first notices we have of our Lord's resurrection, are connected with the visit of the
women to the sepulchre, on the morning of the first day of the week. According to Luke,
the women who had stood by the cross, went home and rested during the sabbath (23:56);
and Mark adds that after the sabbath was ended, that is, after sunset, and during
the evening, they prepared spices in order to go and embalm our Lord's body. They
were either not aware of the previous embalming by Joseph and Nicodemus; or else
they also wished to testify their respect and affection to their Lord, by completing, more
perfectly, what before had been done in haste; John 19: 40-42.
</p>

<p>
It is in just this portion of the history, which relates to the visit of the women to the
tomb and the appearance of Jesus to them, that most of the alleged difficulties and discrepancies
in this part of the Gospel narratives are found. We will therefore take up the chief
of them in their order.
</p>

<p>
I. <hi rend='italic'>The Time</hi>. All the Evangelists agree in saying that the women went out <emph>very early</emph>
<pb n='499'/><anchor id='Pg499'/>
to the sepulchre. Matthew's expression is, <hi rend='italic'>as the day was dawning</hi>. Mark's words are,
<hi rend='italic'>very early</hi>: which indeed are less definite, but are appropriate to denote the same point of
time. Luke has the more poetic term: <hi rend='italic'>deep morning</hi>, i. e. early dawn. John's language
is likewise definite: <hi rend='italic'>early, while it was yet dark</hi>. All these expressions go to fix the
time at what we call <hi rend='italic'>early dawn</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>early twilight</hi>; after the break of day, but while the
light is yet struggling with darkness.
</p>

<p>
Thus far there is no difficulty; and none would ever arise, had not Mark added the
phrase, <hi rend='italic'>the sun being risen</hi>; or, as the English version has it, <hi rend='italic'>at the rising of the sun</hi>.
These words seem, at first, to be at direct variance both with the <hi rend='italic'>very early</hi> of Mark himself,
and with the language of the other Evangelists. To harmonise this apparent discrepancy,
we may premise, that since Mark himself first specifies the point of time by a phrase
sufficiently definite in itself, and supported by all the other Evangelists, we must conclude
that when he adds, <hi rend='italic'>at the rising of the sun</hi>, he did not mean to contradict himself, but
used this latter phrase in a broader and less definite sense. As the sun is the source of
light and of the day, and as his earliest rays produce the contrast between darkness and
light, between night and dawn, so the term sunrising might easily come in popular
language, by a metonymy of cause for effect, to be put for all that earlier interval, when
his rays, still struggling with darkness, do nevertheless usher in the day.
</p>

<p>
Accordingly, we find such a popular usage prevailing among the Hebrews; and several
instances of it occur in the Old Testament. Thus in Judg. 9: 33, the message of Zebul
to Abimelech, after directing him to lie in wait with his people in the field during the
night, goes on as follows: <q>and it shall be, in the morning, as soon as the sun is up thou
shalt rise early and set upon the city;</q> yet we cannot for a moment suppose that Abimelech
with his ambuscade was to wait until the sun actually appeared above the horizon,
before he made his onset. So the Psalmist (104: 22), speaking of the young lions that
by night roar after their prey, goes on to say: <q>The sun ariseth, they gather themselves
together, and lay them down in their dens.</q> But wild animals do not wait for the actual
appearance of the sun ere they shrink away to their lairs; the break of day, the dawning
light, is the signal for their retreat. See also Sept. 2 K. 3:22. 2 Sam. 23:4. In all
these passages the language is entirely parallel to that of Mark; and they serve fully to
illustrate the principle, that the rising of the sun is here used in a popular sense as equivalent
to the <hi rend='italic'>rising of the day</hi> or early dawn.
</p>

<p>
II. <hi rend='italic'>The Number of the Women.</hi> Matthew mentions Mary Magdalene and the other
Mary; v. 1. Mark enumerates Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and Salome;
v. 1. Luke has Mary Magdalene, Joanna, Mary the mother of James, and others with
them; v. 10. John speaks of Mary Magdalene alone, and says nothing of any other. The
first three Evangelists accord then in respect to the two Marys, but no further; while
John differs from them all. Is there here a real discrepancy?
</p>

<p>
We may at once answer, No; because, according to the sound canon of Le Clerc:<note place='foot'>Harm. p. 525. Can. XII. fin.</note>
<q><hi rend='italic'>Qui plura narrat, pauciora complectitur; qui pauciora memorat, plura non negat.</hi></q>
Because John, in narrating circumstances with which he was personally connected, sees
fit to mention only Mary Magdalene, it does not at all follow that others were not present.
Because Matthew, perhaps for like reasons, speaks only of the two Marys, he by no means
excludes the presence of others. Indeed, the very words which John puts into the mouth
of Mary Magdalene, (v. 2), presupposes the fact, that others had gone with her to the
sepulchre. That there was something in respect to Mary Magdalene, which gave her a
peculiar prominence in these transactions, may be inferred from the fact, that not only
John mentions her alone, but likewise all the other Evangelists name her first, as if
holding the most conspicuous place.
</p>

<p>
The instance here under consideration is parallel to that of the demoniacs of Gadara,
and the blind men at Jericho; where, in both cases, Matthew speaks of two persons,
while Mark and Luke mention only one.<note place='foot'>Matt. 8: 28, Mark 5: 2. Luke 8: 27.&mdash;Matt. 20: 30. Mark 10: 46. Luke
18: 35.</note> Something peculiar in the station or character
of one of the persons, rendered him in each case more prominent, and led the two latter
Evangelists to speak of him particularly. But there, as here, their language is not exclusive;
nor is there in it anything that contradicts the statements of Matthew.
</p>

<p>
III. <hi rend='italic'>The Arrival at the Sepulchre.</hi> According to Mark, Luke, and John, the women
on reaching the sepulchre found the great stone, with which it had been closed, already
<pb n='500'/><anchor id='Pg500'/>
rolled away. Matthew, on the other hand, after narrating that the women went out to
see the sepulchre, proceeds to mention the earthquake, the descent of the angel, his rolling
away the stone and sitting upon it, and the terror of the watch, as if all these things took
place in the presence of the women. The angel too (in v. 5) addresses the women, as if
still sitting upon the stone he had rolled away.
</p>

<p>
The apparent discrepancy, if any, here arises simply from Matthew's brevity in omitting
to state in full what his own narrative presupposes. According to v. 6, Christ was
already risen; and therefore the earthquake and its accompaniments must have taken place
at an earlier point of time, to which the sacred writer returns back in his narration. And
although Matthew does not represent the women as entering the sepulchre, yet in v. 8,
he speaks of them as going out of it; so that of course their interview with the angel took
place, not outside of the sepulchre, but in it, as narrated by the other Evangelists. When
therefore the angel says to them in v. 6, <q>Come, see the place where the Lord lay,</q> this
is not said without the tomb to induce them to enter, as Strauss avers; but within the
sepulchre, just as in Mark v. 6.
</p>

<p>
IV. <hi rend='italic'>The Vision of Angels in the Sepulchre.</hi> Of this John says nothing. Matthew
and Mark speak of one angel; Luke of two. Mark says he was sitting; Luke speaks of
them as standing. This difference in respect to numbers is parallel to the case of the
women, which we have just considered; and requires therefore no further illustration.
</p>

<p>
There is likewise some diversity in the language addressed to the women by the angels.
In Matthew and Mark, the prominent object is the charge to the disciples to depart into
Galilee. In Luke this is not referred to; but the women are reminded of our Lord's own
previous declaration, that he would rise again on the third day. Neither of the Evangelists
here professes to report <emph>all</emph> that was said by the angels; and of course there is no room for
contradiction.
</p>

<p>
§ 3. <hi rend='italic'>The return of the Women to the city, and the first appearance of our Lord.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Matt. 28: 7-10. Mark 16: 8. Luke 24: 9-11. John 20: 1, 2.
</p>

<p>
John, speaking of Mary Magdalene alone, says that having seen that the stone was taken
away from the sepulchre, she went in haste (ran) to tell Peter and John. He says nothing
of her having seen the angels, nor of her having entered the sepulchre at all. The other
Evangelists, speaking of the women generally, relate that they entered the tomb, saw the
angels and then returned into the city. On their way Jesus meets them. They recognize
him; fall at and embrace his feet; and receive his charge to the disciples.&mdash;Was Mary
Magdalene now with the other women? Or did she enter the city by another way? Or
had she left the sepulchre before the rest?
</p>

<p>
It is evident that Mary Magdalene was not with the other women when Jesus thus met
them. Her language to Peter and John forbids the supposition, that she had already seen
the Lord: <q>They have taken away the Lord out of the sepulchre, and we know not where
they have laid him.</q> She therefore must have entered the city by another path and gate;
or else have left the sepulchre before the rest; or possibly both these positions may be
true. She bore her tidings expressly to Peter and John, who would seem to have lodged
by themselves in a different quarter of the city; while the other women went apparently to
the rest of the disciples. But this supposition of a different route is essential, only in
connection with the view, that she left the tomb with the other women. That, however,
she actually departed from the sepulchre before her companions, would seem most probable;
inasmuch as she speaks to Peter and John only of the absence of the Lord's body; says
nothing in this connection of a vision of angels; and when, after returning again to the
tomb, she sees the angels, it is evidently for the first time; and she repeats to them as the
cause of her grief her complaint as to the disappearance of the body; John 20: 12, 13.
She may have turned back from the tomb without entering it at all, so soon as she saw
that it was open; inferring from the removal of the stone, that the sepulchre had been
rifled. Or, she may first have entered with the rest, when, according to Luke, <q>they
found not the body of the Lord Jesus,</q> and <q>were much perplexed thereabout,</q> before
the angels became visible to them. The latter supposition seems best to meet the
exigencies of the case.
</p>

<p>
<q>As the other women went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying, All
hail. And they came, and held him by the feet, and worshipped him. Then Jesus said
unto them, Be not afraid; go, tell my brethren, that they go into Galilee, and there shall
they see me.</q> The women had left the sepulchre <q>with fear and great joy</q> after the
<pb n='501'/><anchor id='Pg501'/>
declaration of the angels that Christ was risen; or, as Mark has it, <q>they trembled and
were amazed.</q> Jesus meets them with words of gentleness to quiet their terrors; <q>Be
not afraid.</q> He permits them to approach, and embrace his feet, and testify their joy and
homage. He reiterates to them the message of the angels to his <q>brethren,</q> the eleven
disciples; see v. 16.
</p>

<p>
This appearance and interview is narrated only by Matthew; none of the other
Evangelists give any hint of it. Matthew here stops short. Mark simply relates that the
women fled from the tomb; <q>neither said they anything to any one, for they were afraid.</q>
This of course can only mean, that they spoke of what they had thus seen to no one while
on their way to the city; for the very charge of the angels, which they went to fulfil, was,
that they should <q>go their way and tell his disciples;</q> v. 7. Luke narrates more fully,
that <q>they returned from the sepulchre, and told all these things unto the eleven, and to
all the rest.&mdash;And their words seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed them not.</q>
We may perhaps see in this language one reason why the other Evangelists have omitted to
mention this appearance of our Lord. The disciples <emph>disbelieved the report of the women</emph>,
that they had seen Jesus. In like manner they afterwards disbelieved the report of Mary
Magdalene to the same effect; Mark 16: 11. They were ready, it would seem, to admit
the testimony of the women to the absence of the body, and to the vision of angels; but
not to the resurrection of Jesus and his appearance to them; Luke 24: 21-24. And
afterwards, when the eleven had become convinced by the testimony of their own senses,
those first two appearances to the women became of less importance and were less regarded.
Hence the silence of three Evangelists as to the one; of two as to the other; and of Paul
as to both; 1 Cor. 15: 5, 6.
</p>

<p>
§ 4. <hi rend='italic'>Peter and John visit the Sepulchre. Jesus appears to Mary Magdalene.</hi>
</p>

<p>
John 20: 3-18. Luke 24: 12. Mark 16: 9-11.
</p>

<p>
The full account of these two events is given solely by John. Matthew has not a word
of either; Luke merely mentions, in general, that Peter, on the report of the women,
went to the sepulchre; while Mark speaks only of our Lord's appearance to Mary
Magdalene, which he seems to represent as his <emph>first</emph> appearance.
</p>

<p>
According to John's account, Peter and the beloved disciple, excited by the tidings of
Mary Magdalene that the Lord's body had been taken away, hasten to the sepulchre.
They run; John outruns Peter, comes first to the tomb, and stooping down, sees the
grave-clothes lying, but he does not enter. The other women are no longer at the tomb;
nor have the disciples met them on the way. Peter now comes up; he enters the the tomb,
and sees the grave-clothes lying, and the napkin that was about his head not lying with
the rest, but wrapped together in a place by itself. John too now enters the sepulchre;
<q>and he saw and believed.</q>
</p>

<p>
What was it that John thus believed? The mere report of Mary Magdalene, that
the body had been removed? So much he must have believed when he stooped down
and looked into the sepulchre. For this, there was no need that he should enter the
tomb. His belief must have been of something more and greater. The grave-clothes
lying orderly in their place, and the napkin folded together by itself, made it evident
that the sepulchre had not been rifled nor the body stolen by violent hands; for these
garments and spices would have been of more value to thieves, than merely a naked
corpse; at least, they would not have taken the trouble thus to fold them together.
The same circumstances showed also that the body had not been removed by friends;
for they would not thus have left the grave-clothes behind. All these considerations
produce in the mind of John the germ of a belief that Jesus was risen from the dead.
He believed <emph>because</emph> he saw; <q><hi rend='italic'>for</hi> as yet they knew not the Scripture;</q> (v. 9). He
now began more fully to recall and understand our Lord's repeated declaration, that he
was to rise again on the third day;<note place='foot'>Matt. 16: 21. 17: 23. Luke 9: 22. 24: 6, 7. al.</note> a declaration on which the Jews had already acted
in setting a watch.<note place='foot'>Matt. 28: 63 sq.</note> In this way, the difficulty which is sometimes urged of an apparent
want of connection between verses 8 and 9, disappears.
</p>

<p>
The two disciples went their way, <q>wondering in themselves at what was come to pass.</q>
Mary Magdalene who had followed them back to the sepulchre, remained before it weeping.
While she thus wept, she too, like John, stooped down and looked in, <q>and seeth two
<pb n='502'/><anchor id='Pg502'/>
angels, in white, sitting, the one at the head and the other at the feet, where the body
of Jesus had lain.</q> To their inquiry why she wept, her reply was the same report which
she had before borne to the two disciples: <q>Because they have taken away my Lord,
and I know not where they have laid him,</q> v. 13. Of the angels we learn nothing
further. The whole character of this representation seems to show clearly, that Mary
had not before seen the angels; and also that she had not before been told, that Jesus
was risen. We must otherwise regard her as having been in a most unaccountably obtuse
and unbelieving frame of mind; the very contrary of which seems to have been the fact.
If also she had before informed the two disciples of a vision of angels and of Christ's
resurrection, it is difficult to see, why John should omit to mention this circumstance, so
important and so personal to himself.
</p>

<p>
After replying to the angels, Mary turns herself about, and sees a person standing near,
whom, from his being present there, she takes to be the keeper of the garden. He too
inquires, why she weeps. Her reply is the same as before; except that she, not
unnaturally, supposes him to have been engaged in removing the body, which she desires
to recover. He simply utters in reply, in well-known tones, the name Mary! and the
whole truth flashes upon her soul; doubt is dispelled, and faith triumphs. She exclaims:
<q>Rabboni!</q> as much as to say, <q>My dearest Master!</q> and apparently, like the other
women,<note place='foot'>Matt. 28: 9.</note> falls at his feet in order to embrace and worship him. This Jesus forbids her
to do, in these remarkable words: <q>Touch me not: for I am not yet ascended to my
Father. But go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your
Father, and to my God and your God;</q> v. 17.
</p>

<p>
There remains to be considered the circumstance, that Mark, in v. 9, seems to
represent this appearance of Jesus at the sepulchre to Mary Magdalene, as his first
appearance: <q>Now, being risen early the first of the week, he appeared <emph>first</emph> to
Mary Magdalene.</q> In attempting to harmonize this with Matthew's account of our
Lord's appearance to the other women on their return from the sepulchre, several
methods have been adopted; but the most to the purpose is the view which regards
the word <hi rend='italic'>first</hi>, in Mark v. 9, as put not absolutely, but relatively. That is to say,
Mark narrates three, and only three, appearances of our Lord; <hi rend='italic'>of these three</hi>, that to Mary
Magdalene takes place <emph>first</emph>, and that to the assembled disciples the same evening occurs
<hi rend='italic'>last</hi>, v. 14. A similar example occurs in 1 Cor. 15: 5-8, where Paul enumerates
those to whom the Lord showed himself after his resurrection, viz. to Peter, to the twelve,
to five hundred brethren, to James, to all the apostles, and <hi rend='italic'>last of all</hi> to Paul also. Now
had Paul written here, as with strict propriety he might have done, <q>he was seen <hi rend='italic'>first</hi> of
Cephas,</q> assuredly no one would ever have understood him as intending to assert that the
appearance to Peter was the first absolutely; that is, as implying that Jesus was seen of
Peter before he appeared to Mary Magdalene and the other women. In like manner when
John declares (21: 14) that Jesus showed himself to his disciples by the lake of Galilee
for the <emph>third</emph> time after he was risen from the dead; this is said relatively to the two
previous appearances to the assembled apostles; and does by no means exclude the four
still earlier appearances, viz. to Peter, to the two at Emmaus, to Mary Magdalene, and to
the other women,&mdash;one of which John himself relates in full.
</p>

<p>
In this way the old difficulty in the case before us disappears; and the complex and
cumbrous machinery of earlier commentators becomes superfluous.
</p>

<p>
After her interview with Jesus, Mary Magdalene returns to the city, and tells the
disciples that she had seen the Lord and that he had spoken these things unto her.
According to Mark (vs. 10, 11), the disciples were <q>mourning and weeping;</q> and when
the heard that Jesus was alive and had been seen of her, they believed not.
</p>

<p>
§ 5. <hi rend='italic'>Jesus appears to two disciples on the way to Emmaus. Also to Peter.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Luke 24: 13-35. Mark 16: 12, 13. 1 Cor. 15: 5.
</p>

<p>
This appearance on the way to Emmaus is related in full only by Luke. Mark merely
notes the fact; while the other two Evangelists and Paul (1 Cor. 15: 5) make no mention
of it.
</p>

<p>
On the afternoon of the same day on which our Lord arose, two of his disciples, one of
them named Cleopas, were on their way on foot to a village called Emmaus, sixty stadia
or seven and a half Roman miles distant from Jerusalem,&mdash;a walk of some two or two
<pb n='503'/><anchor id='Pg503'/>
and a half hours. They had heard and credited the tidings brought by the women,
and also by Peter and John, that the sepulchre was open and empty; and that the women
had also seen a vision of angels, who said that Jesus was alive. They had most probably
likewise heard the reports of Mary Magdalene and the other women, that Jesus himself
had appeared to them; but these they did not regard, and do not mention them (v. 24);
because they, like the other disciples, had looked upon them <q>as idle tales, and they
believed them not;</q> v. 11. As they went, they were sad, and talked together of all these
things which had happened. After some time Jesus himself drew near and went with
them. But they knew him not. Mark says he was in another form; Luke affirms
that <q>their eyes were holden, that they should not know him;</q> v. 16. Was there in this
anything miraculous? The <q>another form</q> of Mark, Doddridge explains by <q>a different
habit from what he ordinarily wore.</q> His garments, of course, were not his former ones;
and this was probably one reason why Mary Magdalene had before taken him for
the keeper of the garden.<note place='foot'>See also John 21: 4.</note> It may be, too, that these two disciples had not been
intimately acquainted with the Lord. He had arrived at Jerusalem only six days before
his crucifixion; and these might possibly have been recent converts, who had not before
seen him. To such, the change of garments, and the unexpectedness of the meeting,
would render a recognition more difficult; nor could it be regarded as surprising, that
under such circumstances they should not know him. Still, all this is hypothesis; and the
averment of Luke, that <q>their eyes were holden,</q> and the manner of our Lord's parting
from them afterwards, seem more naturally to imply that the idea of a supernatural
agency, affecting not Jesus himself, but the eyes or minds of the two disciples, was in the
mind of the sacred writer.
</p>

<p>
Jesus inquires the cause of their sadness; chides them for their slowness of heart
to believe what the prophets had spoken; and then proceeds to expound unto them <q>in
all the Scriptures the things concerning himself.</q> They feel the power of his words; and
their hearts burn within them. By this time they drew nigh to the village whither they
went; it was toward evening, and the day was far spent. Their journey was ended; and
Jesus was about to depart from them. In accordance with oriental hospitality they
constrained him to remain with them. He consents; and as he sat at meat with them, he
took bread, and blessed and brake, and gave unto them. At this time, and in connection
with this act, their eyes were opened; they knew him; and he vanished away from them.
Here too the question is raised, whether the language necessarily implies anything miraculous?
Our English translators have rendered this passage in the margin, <q>he ceased to
be seen of them;</q> and have referred to Luke 4: 30, and John 8: 59, as illustrating this
idea. They might also have referred to Acts 8: 39. Still, the language is doubtless such
as the sacred writers would most naturally have employed in order directly to express the
idea of supernatural agency.
</p>

<p>
Full of wonder and joy, the two disciples set off the same hour and return to Jerusalem.
They find the eleven and other disciples assembled; and as they enter, they are met with
the joyful exclamation: <q>The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared unto Simon;</q>
v. 34.  They then rehearse what had happened to themselves; but, according to Mark,
the rest believed them not. As in the case of the women, so here, there would seem to
have been something in the position or character of these two disciples, which led the
others to give less credit to their testimony, than to that of Peter, one of the leading
apostles.
</p>

<p>
This appearance to Peter is mentioned by no other Evangelist; and we know nothing of
the particular time, nor of the attending circumstances. It would seem to have taken
place either not long before, or else shortly after, that to the two disciples. It had not
happened when they left Jerusalem for Emmaus; or, at least, they had not heard of it.
It had occurred when they returned; and that long enough before to have been fully
reported to all the disciples and believed by them. It may perhaps have happened about
the time when the two disciples set off, or shortly afterwards.
</p>

<p>
Paul, in enumerating those by whom the Lord was seen after his resurrection (1 Cor.
15: 5), mentions Peter first; passing over the appearances to the women, and also that
to the two disciples; probably because they did not belong among the apostles.
</p>

<pb n='504'/><anchor id='Pg504'/>

<p>
§ 6. <hi rend='italic'>Jesus appears to the Apostles in the absence of Thomas; and afterwards when
Thomas is present.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Mark 16: 14-18. Luke 24: 36-48. John 20: 19-29. 1 Cor. 15: 5.
</p>

<p>
The narrative of our Lord's first appearance to the apostles is most fully given by Luke:
John adds a few circumstances; and Mark, as well as Luke, has preserved the first charge
thus privately given to the apostles, to preach the Gospel in all the world,&mdash;a charge afterwards
repeated in a more public and solemn manner on the mountain in Galilee. When
Paul says the Lord appeared to <hi rend='italic'>the twelve</hi>, he obviously employs this number as being the
usual designation of the apostles; and very probably includes both the occasion narrated
in this section. Mark and Luke speak in like manner of <hi rend='italic'>the eleven</hi>; and yet we know
from John, that Thomas was not at first among them; so that of course only <emph>ten</emph> were
actually present.
</p>

<p>
According to Mark, the disciples were at their evening meal; which implies a not very
late hour. John says the doors were shut, for fear of the Jews. While the two who had
returned from Emmaus were still recounting what had happened unto them, Jesus himself
<q>came and stood in the midst of them, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you!</q>
The question here again is raised, whether this entrance of our Lord was miraculous? That
it might have been so, there is no reason to doubt. He who in the days of his flesh
walked upon the waters, and before whose angel the iron gate of the prison opened of its
own accord so that Peter might pass out; he who was himself just risen from the dead;
might well in same miraculous way present himself to his followers in spite of bolts and
bars. But does the language here necessarily imply a miracle? The doors indeed were
shut; but the word used does not of itself signify that they were bolted or fastened. The
object no doubt was, to prevent access to spies from the Jews; or also to guard themselves
from the danger of being arrested; and both these objects might perhaps have been as
effectually accomplished by a watch at or before the door. Nor do the words used of our
Lord strictly indicate anything miraculous. We do not find here a form of the word commonly
employed to express the sudden appearance of angels; but, <q>he <hi rend='italic'>came</hi> and stood in
the midst of them;</q> implying <hi rend='italic'>per se</hi> nothing more than the ordinary mode of approach.
There is, in fact, nothing in the whole account to suggest a miracle, except the remark of
John respecting the doors; and as this circumstance is not mentioned either by Mark or
Luke, it may be doubtful whether we are necessarily compelled by the language to regard
the mode of our Lord's entrance as miraculous.
</p>

<p>
At this interview Thomas was not present. On his return the other disciples relate to
him the circumstances. But Thomas now disbelieved the others; as they before had disbelieved
the women. His reply was, <q>except I shall see in his hands the print of the
nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I
will not believe.</q> Our Lord had compassion upon his perverseness. Eight days afterwards,
when the disciples were again assembled and Thomas with them, our Lord came as
before, and stood in the midst, and said, Peace be unto you! He permits to Thomas the
test he had demanded; and charges him to be not faithless, but believing. Thomas, convinced
and abashed, exclaims in the fulness of faith and joy, My Lord and my God!
recognising and acknowledging thereby the divine nature thus manifested in the flesh.
The reply of our Lord to Thomas is strikingly impressive and condemnatory of his want
of faith: <q>Thomas, because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed; blessed are they that
have not seen, and yet have believed!</q> He and the other disciples, who were to be the
heralds of the Lord's resurrection to the world as the foundation of the hope of the Gospel,
refused to believe except upon the evidence of their own senses; while all who after them
have borne the Christian Name, have believed this great fact of the Gospel solely upon
their testimony. God has overruled their unbelief for good, in making it a powerful argument
for the truth of their testimony in behalf of this great fact, which they themselves
were so slow to believe. Blessed, indeed, are they who have received their testimony.
</p>

<p>
§ 7. <hi rend='italic'>Our Lord's Appearance in Galilee.</hi>
</p>

<p>
John 21: 1-24. Matt. 28: 16-20. 1 Cor. 15: 6.
</p>

<p>
It appears from the narrative of Matthew, that while the disciples were yet in Jerusalem,
our Lord had appointed a time, when he would meet them in Galilee, upon a certain
<pb n='505'/><anchor id='Pg505'/>
mountain.<note place='foot'>See Matt. 26: 32.</note> They therefore left Jerusalem after the passover, probably soon after the
interview at which Thomas was present, and returned to Galilee, their home. While
waiting for the appointed time, they engaged in their usual occupation of fishermen. On
a certain day, as John relates, towards evening, seven of them being together, including
Peter, Thomas, and the sons of Zebedee, they put out upon the lake with their nets in a
fishing boat; but during the whole night they caught nothing. At early dawn Jesus stood
upon the shore, from which they were not far off, and directed them to cast the net upon
the right side of the boat. <q>They cast therefore, and now they were not able to draw it
for the multitude of the fishes.</q> Recognising in this miracle their risen Lord, they pressed
around him. Peter, with his characteristic ardour, threw himself into the water in order
to reach him the sooner. At their Lord's command they prepared a meal from the fish
they had thus taken. <q>Jesus then cometh and taketh bread, and giveth them, and fish
likewise.</q> This was his third appearance to the eleven; or rather to a large number of
them together. It was on this occasion, and after their meal, that our Lord put to Peter
the touching and thrice repeated question, <q>Lovest thou me?</q>
</p>

<p>
At length the set time arrived; and the eleven disciples went away into the mountain
<q>where Jesus had appointed them.</q> It would seem most probable, that this time and
place had been appointed of our Lord for a solemn and more public interview, not only
with the eleven, whom he had already met, but with all his disciples in Galilee; and that
therefore it was on this same occasion, when, according to Paul, <q>he was seen of above five
hundred brethren at once.</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. 15: 6.</note> That the interview was not confined to the eleven alone,
would seem evident from the fact that <q>some doubted;</q> for this could hardly be supposed
true of any of the eleven, after what had already happened to them in Jerusalem and
Galilee, and after having been appointed to meet their risen Lord at this very time and
place. The appearance of the five hundred must at any rate be referred to Galilee; for
even after our Lord's ascension, the number of the names in Jerusalem were together only
about an hundred and twenty.<note place='foot'>Acts 1: 15.</note> I do not hesitate, therefore, to hold with Flatt,
Olshausen, Hengstenberg, and others, that the appearances thus described by Matthew and
Paul, were identical. It was a great and solemn occasion. Our Lord had directed that
the eleven and all his disciples in Galilee should thus be convened upon the mountain. It
was the closing scene of his ministry in Galilee. Here his life had been spent. Here
most of his mighty works had been done and his discourses held. Here his followers were
as yet most numerous. He therefore here takes leave on earth of those among whom he
had lived and laboured longest; and repeats to all his disciples in public the solemn charge,
which he had already given in private to the apostles: <q>Go ye therefore and teach all
nations:&mdash;and lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world.</q> It was doubtless
his last interview with his disciples in that region,&mdash;his last great act in Galilee.
</p>

<p>
§ 8. <hi rend='italic'>Our Lord's further Appearances at Jerusalem, and his Ascension.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1 Cor. 15: 7. Acts 1: 3-12. Luke 24: 49-53. Mark 16: 19, 20.
</p>

<p>
Luke relates, in Acts 1: 3, that Jesus showed himself alive to his apostles, <q>after his
passion, by many infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the
things pertaining to the kingdom of God.</q> This would seem to imply interviews and communications,
as to which we have little more than this very general notice. One of these
may have been the appearance to James, mentioned by Paul alone (1 Cor. 15: 7), as subsequent
to that to the five hundred brethren. It may be referred with most probability to
Jerusalem, after the return of the Apostles from Galilee. That this return took place by
the Lord's direction, there can be no doubt; although none of the Evangelists have given
us the slightest hint as to any such direction. Indeed, it is this very brevity,&mdash;this omission
to place on record the minor details which might serve to connect the great facts and
events of our Lord's last forty days on earth, that has occasioned all the doubt and difficulty
with which this portion of the written history of these events has been encompassed.&mdash;The
James here intended was probably our Lord's brother; who was of high consideration
in the church, and is often, in the latter books, simply so named without any special
designation.<note place='foot'>See Acts 12: 17. 15: 13. 21: 18. Gal. 2: 9, 12 al.</note> At the time when Paul wrote, the other James, <q>the brother of John,</q> as
he is called, was already dead.<note place='foot'>Acts 12: 1.</note>
</p>

<pb n='506'/><anchor id='Pg506'/>

<p>
After thus appearing to James, our Lord, according to Paul, was seen <q>of all the
apostles.</q> This, too, was apparently an appointed meeting; and was doubtless the same of
which Luke speaks, as occurring in Jerusalem immediately preceding the ascension. It
was, of course, the Lord's last interview with his apostles. He repeats to them the promise
of the baptism with the Holy Spirit as soon to take place; and charges them not to depart
from Jerusalem until this should be accomplished.<note place='foot'>To this interview belongs also Luke 24: 44.</note> Strange as it may appear, the twelve,
in this last solemn moment, put to him the question, <q>Lord, wilt thou at this time restore
the kingdom to Israel?</q> How, indeed, were they to believe! Their gross and darkened
minds, not yet enlightened by the baptism of the Spirit, clung still to the idea of a temporal
Prince and Saviour, who should deliver his people, not from their sins, but from the
galling yoke of Roman dominion. Our Lord deals gently with their ignorance and want of
faith: <q>It is not for you to know the times and seasons;&mdash;but ye shall receive the power
of the Holy Ghost coming upon you; and ye shall be witnesses unto me&mdash;unto the uttermost
part of the earth.</q>
</p>

<p>
During this discourse, or in immediate connection with it, our Lord leads them out <hi rend='italic'>as
far as to</hi> Bethany, and lifting up his hands he blessed them; Luke 24: 50. This act of
blessing must be understood, by all the laws of language, as having taken place at or near
Bethany. <q>And it came to pass, <hi rend='italic'>while</hi> he blessed them, he was parted from them, and
carried up into heaven.</q> Our Lord's ascension, then, took place at or near Bethany.
Indeed, the sacred writer could hardly have found words to express this fact more definitely
and fully; and a doubt on this point could never have suggested itself to the mind of any
reader, but for the language of the same writer, in Acts 1: 12, where he relates that after
the ascension the disciples <q>returned unto Jerusalem by the mount called Olivet.</q> Luke
obviously did not mean to contradict himself; and the most that his expression can be
made to imply, is, that from Bethany, where their Lord had ascended, which lies on the
eastern slope of the Mount of Olives, a mile or more below the summit of the ridge, the
disciples returned to Jerusalem by a path across the mount.
</p>

<p>
As these disciples stood gazing and wondering, while a cloud received their Lord out of
their sight, two angels stood by them in white apparel, announcing unto them, that this
same Jesus, who was thus taken up from them into heaven, shall again so come, in like
manner as they had seen him go into heaven. With this annunciation closes the written
history of our Lord's resurrection and ascension.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='507'/><anchor id='Pg507'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>An Account Of The Trial Of Jesus.</head>

<p>
The death of Jesus is universally regarded among Christians
as a cruel murder, perpetrated under the pretence of a legal
sentence, after a trial, in which the forms of law were essentially
and grossly violated. The Jews to this day maintain, that,
whatever were the merits of the case, the trial was at least
regular, and the sentence legally just; that he was accused of
blasphemy, and convicted of that offence by legal evidence.
The question between them involves two distinct points of
inquiry, namely, first, whether he was guilty of blasphemy; and,
secondly, whether the arraignment and trial were conducted in
the ordinary forms of law. But there will still remain a third
question, namely, whether, admitting that, as a mere man, he
had violated the law against blasphemy, he could legally be put
to death for that cause; and if not, then whether he was justly
condemned upon the new and supplemental accusation of
treason or of sedition, which was vehemently urged against
him. The first and last of these inquiries it is proposed briefly
to pursue; but it will be necessary previously to understand the
light in which he was regarded by the Jewish rulers and people,
the state of their criminal jurisprudence and course of proceeding,
and especially the nature and extent of the law
concerning blasphemy, upon which he was indicted.
</p>

<p>
In the early period of the ministry of Jesus, he does not
appear to have excited among the Pharisees any emotion but
wonder and astonishment, and an intense interest respecting
the nature of his mission. But the people heard him with
increasing avidity, and followed him in countless throngs. He
taught a purer religion than the Scribes and Pharisees, whose
pride and corruption he boldly denounced. He preached charity
<pb n='508'/><anchor id='Pg508'/>
and humility, and perfect holiness of heart and life, as essential
to the favour of God, whose laws he expounded in all the depth
of their spirituality, in opposition to the traditions of the elders,
and the false glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees. These sects
he boldly charged with making void and rejecting the law of
God, and enslaving men by their traditions; he accused them
of hypocrisy, covetousness, oppression, and lust of power and
popularity; and denounced them as hinderers of the salvation
of others, as a generation of serpents and vipers, doomed to
final perdition. It was natural that these terrific denunciations,
from such a personage, supported by his growing power and the
increasing acclamations of the people, should alarm the partisans
of the ancient theocracy, and lead them to desire his
destruction. This alarm evidently increased with the progress
of his ministry; and was greatly heightened by the raising of
Lazarus from the dead, on which occasion the death of Jesus
was definitively resolved on;<note place='foot'>See John xi. 47-54.</note> but no active measures against
him seem to have been attempted, until the time when, under
the parable of the wicked husbandmen who cast the heir out of
the vineyard and slew him, he declared that the kingdom of
God should be taken from them, and given to others more
worthy. Perceiving that he spake this parable against them,
from that hour they sought to lay hands on him, and were
restrained only by fear of the popular indignation.<note place='foot'>Matt. xxi. 33-46. Mark xxii. 1-12. Luke xx. 9-19.</note>
</p>

<p>
Having thus determined to destroy Jesus at all events, as a
person whose very existence was fatal to their own power, and
perhaps, in their view, to the safety of their nation, the first
step was to render him odious to the people; without which
the design would undoubtedly recoil on the heads of its contrivers,
his popularity being unbounded. Countless numbers had
received the benefit of his miraculous gifts; and it was therefore
deemed a vain attempt to found an accusation, at that time, on
any past transaction of his life. A new occasion was accordingly
sought, by endeavouring to <q>entangle him in his talk;</q>
a measure, planned and conducted with consummate cunning
and skill. The Jews were divided into two political parties.
<pb n='509'/><anchor id='Pg509'/>
One of these consisted of the Pharisees, who held it unlawful to
acknowledge or pay tribute to the Roman emperor, because
they were forbidden, by the law of Moses,<note place='foot'>Deut. xvii. 15.</note> to set a king over
them who was a stranger, and not one of their own countrymen.
The other party was composed of the partisans of Herod, who
understood this law to forbid only the voluntary election of a
stranger, and therefore esteemed it not unlawful to submit and
pay tribute to a conqueror. These two parties, though bitterly
opposed to each other, united in the attempt to entrap Jesus,
by the question,&mdash;<q>Is it lawful to give tribute to Cæsar, or
not?</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xxii. 15-22. Mark xii. 13-17. Luke xx. 20-26.</note> If he answered in the negative, the Herodians were to
accuse him to Pilate, for treason; if in the affirmative, the
Pharisees would denounce him to the people, as an enemy to
their liberties.<note place='foot'>Tappan's Jewish Ant. p. 239.</note> This insidious design was signally frustrated
by the wisdom of his reply, when, referring to Cæsar's image
and legend, on the coins which they all received as legally
current, he showed the inconsistency of withholding the
honour due to one thus implicitly acknowledged by both
parties to be their lawful sovereign.
</p>

<p>
Defeated in this attempt to commit him politically, their next
endeavour was to render him obnoxious to one or the other of
the two great religious sects, which were divided upon the doctrine
of the resurrection, the Pharisees affirming, and the Sadducees
denying, that the dead would rise again. The latter he
easily silenced, by a striking exposition of their own law. They
asked him which, of several husbands, would be entitled in the
next world to the wife whom they successively had married in
this; and in reply, he showed them that in heaven the relation
of husband and wife was unknown.<note place='foot'>Matt. xxii. 23-33. Mark xii. 18-27. Luke xx. 27-39.</note>
</p>

<p>
Their last trial was made by a lawyer, who sought to entrap
him into an assertion that one commandment in the law was
greater than another; a design rendered abortive by his reply
that they were all of equal obligation.<note place='foot'>Matt. xxii. 25-40, 46. Mark xii. 28-34.</note>
</p>

<p>
It being apparent, from these successive defeats, that any
<pb n='510'/><anchor id='Pg510'/>
farther attempt to find new matter of accusation would result
only in disgrace to themselves, the enemies of Jesus seem to
have come to the determination to secure his person secretly,
and afterwards to put him to death, in any manner that would
not render them odious to the people. In execution of this
design, they first bribed Judas to betray him by night into
their hands. This object being attained, the next step was to
destroy his reputation, and if possible to render him so vile in
the public estimation, as that his destruction would be regarded
with complacency. Now no charge could so surely produce
this effect, and none could so plausibly be preferred against him,
as that of blasphemy; a crime which the Jews regarded with
peculiar horror. Even their veneration of Jesus, and the awe
which his presence inspired, had not been sufficient to restrain
their rising indignation on several occasions, when they regarded
his language as the blasphemous arrogation of a divine character
and power to himself; and could they now be brought to believe
him a blasphemer, and see him legally convicted of this atrocious
crime, his destruction might easily be brought about,
without any very scrupulous regard to the form, and even with
honour to those by whom it might be accomplished.
</p>

<p>
It will now be necessary to consider more particularly the
nature of the crime of blasphemy, in its larger signification, as
it may be deduced from the law of God. That the spirit of this
law requires from all men, everywhere, and at all times, the
profoundest veneration of the Supreme Being, and the most
submissive acknowledgment of Him as their rightful Sovereign,
is too plain to require argument. If proof were wanted, it is
abundantly furnished in the Decalogue,<note place='foot'>Exodus xx. 1-7. And God spake all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy
God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
Thou shalt have no other gods before me. Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven
image, or any likeness <hi rend='italic'>of any thing</hi> that <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> in heaven above, or that is in the earth
beneath, or that <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> in the water under the earth: Thou shalt not bow down thyself
to them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth <hi rend='italic'>generation</hi> of them
that hate me; And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep
my commandments. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain:
for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.</note> which is admitted
<pb n='511'/><anchor id='Pg511'/>
among Christians to be of universal obligation. At the time
when the Jewish Theocracy was established, idolatry had become
generally prevalent, and men had nearly lost all just notions of
the nature and attributes of their Creator. It is therefore supposed
that the design of Jehovah, in forming the Jewish constitution
and code of laws, was to preserve the knowledge of
himself as the true God, and to retain that people in the strictest
possible allegiance to him alone; totally excluding every
acknowledgment of any other being, either as an object of
worship or a source of power. Hence the severity with which
he required that sorceries, divinations, witchcrafts and false
prophecies, as well as open idolatries, should be punished, they
being alike acts of treason, or, as we might say, of <foreign rend='italic'>præmunire</foreign>,
amounting to the open acknowledgment of a power independent
of Jehovah. Hence, too, the great veneration in which he
commanded that his name and attributes should be held, even
in ordinary conversation. It is the breach of this last law, to
which the term <hi rend='italic'>blasphemy</hi>, in its more restricted sense, has
usually been applied;<note place='foot'>Lev. xxiv. 11-16. And the Israelitish woman's son blasphemed the name <hi rend='italic'>of
the Lord</hi>, and cursed; and they brought him unto Moses (and his mother's name
was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan): And they put him in
ward, that the mind of the Lord might be shewed them. And the Lord spake unto
Moses, saying, Bring forth him that hath cursed without the camp, and let all that
heard <hi rend='italic'>him</hi> lay their hands upon his head, and let all the congregation stone him.
And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, Whosoever curseth his God
shall bear his sin. And he that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, he shall surely
be put to death, <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> all the congregation shall certainly stone him: as well the
stranger, as he that is born in the land, when he blasphemeth the name <hi rend='italic'>of the Lord</hi>,
shall be put to death. See A. Clarke on Matt. ix. 3.</note> but originally the command evidently
extended to every word or act, directly in derogation of the
sovereignty of Jehovah, such as speaking in the name of another
god,<note place='foot'>Deut. xiii. 6-10. If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy
daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine own soul, entice
thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which thou hast not known,
thou, nor thy fathers; <hi rend='italic'>Namely</hi>, of the gods of the people which <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> round about you,
nigh unto thee, or far off from thee, from the <hi rend='italic'>one</hi> end of the earth even unto the <hi rend='italic'>other</hi>
end of the earth; Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him; neither
shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou spare, neither shalt thou conceal him:
But thou shalt surely kill him; thine hand shall be first upon him to
death, and afterwards the hand of all the people. And thou shalt stone him with
<hi rend='italic'>stones</hi> that he die; because he hath sought to thrust thee away from the Lord thy
God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt from the house of bondage.
Deut. xviii. 20. But the prophet, which shall presume to speak a word in my name,
which I have not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the name of other
gods, even that prophet shall die.</note> or omitting, on any occasion that required it, to give to
<pb n='512'/><anchor id='Pg512'/>
Jehovah the honour due to his own name.<note place='foot'>It is true that in the Mishna it is written&mdash;<q>Blasphemus non tenetur, nisi expressit
Nomen.</q> Mishna, Pars iv. p. 242. Tractatus de Synedriis, cap. 7, § 5. But
these traditions were not written until 150 years after the time of our Saviour; and
the passage, moreover, seems properly to refer to that form of blasphemy which
consists in evil speaking of the Supreme Being, in a direct manner, rather than to
the other forms in which this offence, in its larger acceptation, might be committed.
See Michælis, Comm. Art. 251. Vol. 4, p. 67-70.</note> Thus, when Moses
and Aaron, at the command of God, smote the rock in Kadesh,
that from it waters might flow to refresh the famishing multitude,
but neglected to honour him as the source of the miraculous
energy, and arrogated it to themselves, saying, <q>Hear now,
ye rebels, must <hi rend='italic'>we</hi> bring you water out of this rock?</q><note place='foot'>Numb. xx. 10, 12.</note> this
omission drew on them his severe displeasure. <q>And the Lord
spake unto Moses and Aaron, Because ye believed me not, to
sanctify <hi rend='italic'>me</hi> in the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore <hi rend='italic'>ye</hi>
shall not bring this congregation into the land which I have
given them.</q> Accordingly, both Moses and Aaron died before
the Israelites entered into the promised land.<note place='foot'>Numb. xx. 24. Deut. i. 37, and xxxiv. 4, 5.</note> No other deity
was permitted to be invoked; no miracle must be wrought, but
in the name of God alone. <q>I am Jehovah; that is my name;
and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to
graven images.</q><note place='foot'>Is. xlii. 8, and xlviii. 2.</note> This was ever a cardinal principle of his law,
neither newly announced by Isaiah, nor by Moses. Its promulgation
on Mount Sinai was merely declaratory of what had
been well understood at the beginning, namely, that God alone
was the Lord of all power and might, and would be expressly
acknowledged as such, in every exertion of superhuman energy
or wisdom. Thus Joseph, when required to interpret the dream
of Pharaoh, replied, <q>It is not in me: God shall give Pharaoh
an answer of peace.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. xli. 16, 25, 28.</note> And Moses, in all the miracles previously
<pb n='513'/><anchor id='Pg513'/>
wrought by him in Egypt, expressly denounced them
as the judgments of God, by whose hand alone they were
inflicted.<note place='foot'>Exod. viii. ix. x. per tot.</note> After the solemn re-enactment of this law on
Mount Sinai, its signal violation by Moses and Aaron deserved
to be made as signal an example of warning; and this judgment
of Jehovah may be said to constitute the leading case under
this article of the law; forming a rule of action and of judgment
for all cases of miracles which might be wrought in all coming
time. The same principle was afterwards expressly extended
to prophesying. <q>The prophet&mdash;that shall speak in the name
of other gods, even that prophet shall die.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. xviii. 20.</note> His character of
prophet, and even his inspiration, shall not authorize him to
prophesy but in the name of the Lord. He shall not exercise
his office in his own name, nor in any name but that of Jehovah,
from whom his power was derived.
</p>

<p>
That such was understood to be the true meaning of this law
of God, is further evident from the practice of the prophets, in
later times, to whom was given the power of working miracles.
These they always wrought in his name, expressly acknowledged
at the time. Thus, the miracle of thunder and rain in the
season of the wheat-harvest, called for by Samuel, he expressly
attributed to the Lord.<note place='foot'><q>Now, therefore, stand and see this great thing, which the <hi rend='smallcaps'>Lord</hi> will do before
your eyes.</q> 1 Sam. xii. 16-18.</note> So did Elijah, when he called fire
from heaven to consume his sacrifice, in refutation of the claims
of Baal.<note place='foot'><q>And it came to pass, at the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice, that
Elijah the prophet came near and said, Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel,
let it be known this day that <hi rend='italic'>thou art God in Israel</hi>,</q> &amp;c. 1 Kings xviii. 36-38.</note> So did Elisha, when he divided the waters of Jordan,
by smiting them with the mantle of Elijah;<note place='foot'><q>And he took the mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and smote the waters, and
said, <hi rend='italic'>Where is the Lord God of Elijah?</hi></q> &amp;c. 2 Kings ii. 14.</note> and again, when
he miraculously multiplied the loaves of bread, for the people
that were with him;<note place='foot'><q><hi rend='italic'>For thus saith the Lord</hi>, they shall eat and shall leave thereof,</q> &amp;c. 2 Kings
iv. 43.</note> and again, when he caused the young
man's eyes to be opened, that he might behold the hosts of
the Lord around him, and smote his enemies with blindness.<note place='foot'>See 2 Kings vi. 16, 17, 18, 20. In some other places, where there is no express
reference to the power of God, the omission may be attributed to the brevity of the
narrative; but even in those cases, such reference is plainly implied.</note>
<pb n='514'/><anchor id='Pg514'/>
And even the angel Gabriel, when sent to interpret to Daniel
the things which should befall his people in the latter days,
explicitly announced himself as speaking in Jehovah's name.<note place='foot'>Dan. ix. 21, 23, and x. 11, 12. See further, 2 Kings xviii. 30-35, and xix. 1-3.</note>
</p>

<p>
The same view of the sinfulness of exercising superhuman
power without an express acknowledgment of God as its author,
and of any usurpation of his authority, continued to prevail,
down to the time of our Saviour. Thus, when he said to the
sick of the palsy, <q>Son, be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven
thee,</q> certain of the Scribes said within themselves, <q>This man
blasphemeth. Who can forgive sins, but God alone?</q><note place='foot'>Matt. ix. 2, 3. Luke v. 20, 21.</note> And
again, when the Jews, on another occasion, took up stones to
stone him, and Jesus, appealing to his good works done among
them, asked for which of them he was to be stoned; they
replied, <q>For a good work we stone thee not, but for blasphemy,
and because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God.</q><note place='foot'>John x. 31-33.</note>
Yet Jesus had on no occasion mentioned the <emph>name</emph> of Jehovah,
but with profound reverence.
</p>

<p>
Thus it appears that the law of blasphemy, as it was understood
among the Jews, extended not only to the offence of
impiously using the name of the Supreme Being, but to every
usurpation of his authority, or arrogation, by a created being,
of the honour and power belonging to him alone.<note place='foot'>This view of the Jewish law may seem opposed to that of Dr. Campbell, in his
Preliminary Dissertation on the Gospels, (Vol. 2, Diss. ix. Part 2); but it is evident,
on examination, that he is discussing the <hi rend='italic'>word blasphemy</hi>, and the propriety of
its application, taken in its more restricted sense of intentional and direct malediction
of Jehovah; and not whether the assumption of his attributes and authority was or
was not a violation of his law. That this assumption was a heinous transgression,
seems universally agreed. The question, therefore, is reduced to this&mdash;whether the
offence was properly <emph>termed</emph> blasphemy. For the <emph>act</emph>, by whatever name it were
called, was a capital crime. The Jewish judges of that day held it to amount to
blasphemy; and in so doing, they do not appear to have given to their law a construction
more expanded and comprehensive than has been given by judges in our
own times, to the law of treason, or of sedition.</note> Like the
crime of treason among men, its essence consisted in acknowledging
or setting up the authority of another sovereign than
<pb n='515'/><anchor id='Pg515'/>
one's own, or invading the powers pertaining exclusively to him;
an offence, of which the case of Moses, before cited, is a prominent
instance, both in its circumstances and in its punishment.
Whether a false god was acknowledged or the true one denied,
and whether the denial was in express terms, or by implication,
in assuming to do, by underived power, and in one's own name,
that which God only could perform, the offence was essentially
the same. And in such horror was it held by the Israelites,
that in token of it every one was obliged, by an early and universal
custom, to rend his garments, whenever it was committed
or related in his presence.<note place='foot'>This was judicially and solemnly done by the members of the Sanhedrim, rising
from their seats, when the crime was testified to. Only one witness was permitted
to repeat the words; the others simply stating that they heard the same which he
had related. The practice is thus described in the Mishna: <q>Exactis omnibus,
interrogant vetustissimum testium, dicendo,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Edissere, quodcumque audivisti expresse</hi>.
Tum ille hoc refert. Judices autem stant erecti, vestesque discerpunt, non resarciendas.
Dein secundus tertiusque ait,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ego idem, quod ille audivi</hi>.</q> Mishna, Pars 4.
Tractat. de Synedriis, cap. 7, § 5. Upon which, Cocceius remarks:&mdash;<q>Assurgunt
reverentiæ causâ. Mos discendarum vestium probatur ex 2do Regum, xviii. 37.
Hinc nata est regula,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Qui blasphemiam audit, vel ab ipso auctore vel ex alio, tenetur
vestem discerpere</hi>. Ratio est, ut semper ob oculos et animum versetur mæroris aut
indignationis mnemosynon.</q> Coccej. in loc. § 11, 12. The custom is fully explained,
with particular reference to the high priest at the trial of Jesus, by Hedenus, <hi rend='italic'>De
Scissione Vestium</hi>, 38, 42. (In Ugolini Thesauro, tom. xxix, fol. 1025. &amp;c.)</note> This sentiment was deeply felt
by the whole people, as a part of their religion.
</p>

<p>
Such being the general scope and spirit of the law, it would
seem to have been easy to prove that Jesus had repeatedly
incurred its penalties. He had performed many miracles, but
never in any other name than his own. In his own name, and
without the recognition of any higher power, he had miraculously
healed the sick, restored sight to the blind and strength
to the lame, cast out devils, rebuked the winds, calmed the sea,
and raised the dead. In his own name, also, and with no
allusion to the Omniscient, no <q>Thus saith the Lord,</q> he had
prophesied of things to come. He had by his own authority
forgiven sins, and promised, by his own power, not only to raise
the dead, but to resume his own life, after he should, as he predicted,
be put to death. Finally, he had expressly claimed for
himself a divine origin and character, and the power to judge
<pb n='516'/><anchor id='Pg516'/>
both the quick and the dead<note place='foot'>That the Jews understood Jesus to make himself equal with God, is maintained
by Mr. Salvador, himself a Jew, in his Histoire des Institutions de Moïse et du
Peuple Hébreu, Liv. iv. ch. 3, p. 81, of which chapter a translation is given at the
end of this article. Mr. Noah, also a Jew, seems to be of opinion, that Jesus was
brought to trial under the law in Deut. xiii. 1-11. See his Discourse on the Restoration
of the Jews, p. 19. But whether he was charged with a blasphemous
usurpation of the attributes of Deity, or with sedition, in inciting the people to serve
another god, meaning himself, the difference is of no importance; the essence of the
offence in both cases being the same.</note>. Considered as a man, he had
usurped the attributes of God. That he was not arrested at an
earlier period, is to be attributed to his great popularity, and
the astounding effect of his miracles. His whole career had
been resplendent with beneficence to the thousands who surrounded
him. His eloquence surpassed all that had been
uttered by man. The people were amazed, bewildered, and
fascinated, by the resistless power of his life. It was not until
his last triumphal visit to Jerusalem, after he had openly
raised Lazarus from the dead, when the chief priests and elders
perceived that <q>the world was gone after him,</q> that they were
stricken with dismay and apprehension for their safety, and
under this panic resolved upon the perilous measure of his
destruction.
</p>

<p>
The only safe method in which this could be accomplished,
was under the sanction of a legal trial and sentence. Jesus,
therefore, upon his apprehension, was first brought before the
great tribunal of the Sanhedrim, and charged with the crime of
blasphemy. What were the specifications under this general
charge, or whether any were necessary, we are not informed.
But that this was the offence charged, is manifest both from the
evidence adduced and from the judgment of conviction.<note place='foot'>Matt. xxvi. 60-65. This view of the nature of the offence with which Jesus
was charged, is confirmed by the learned jurist, Chr. Thomasius, in his Dissertatio
de injusto Pilati judicio, § 11, 12, and by the authors whom he there cites. Dissert.
Thomasii. vol. 1, p. 5.</note> Such
was the estimation in which he was held, that it was with great
difficulty that witnesses could be found to testify against him;
and the two who at last were procured, testified falsely, in
applying his words to the temple of Solomon, which he spake
of the temple of his body. When, upon the occasion of his
<pb n='517'/><anchor id='Pg517'/>
scourging the money-changers out of the temple, the Jews
demanded by what authority he did this, Jesus replied, alluding
to his own person, <q>Destroy <emph>this</emph> temple, and in three days I
will raise it up.</q><note place='foot'>John ii. 13-22.</note> But though the witnesses swore falsely in
testifying that he spake of the Jewish temple, yet his words, in
either sense, amounted to a claim of the power of working
miracles, and so brought him within the law. The high priest,
however, still desirous of new evidence, which might justify his
condemnation in the eyes of the people, proceeded to interrogate
Jesus concerning his character and mission. <q>I adjure
thee, by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the
Christ, the Son of God. Jesus saith unto him, Thou hast said:
nevertheless, I say unto you, hereafter ye shall see the Son of
Man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the
clouds of heaven. Then the high priest <hi rend='italic'>rent his clothes</hi>, saying
He hath <hi rend='italic'>spoken blasphemy</hi>; what <hi rend='italic'>further</hi> need have we of witnesses?
Behold, now <hi rend='italic'>ye have heard his blasphemy</hi>. What
think ye? They answered and said, <hi rend='italic'>He is guilty of death</hi>.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xxvi. 63-66.</note>
We may suppose the multitude standing without the hall of
judgment, able, through its avenues and windows, to see, but
not to hear, all that was transacting within. It became important,
therefore, to obtain some reason upon which the high
priest might rend his clothes in their sight, thus giving to the
people, by this expressive and awful sign, the highest evidence
of blasphemy, uttered by Jesus in the presence of that august
assembly. This act turned the tide of popular indignation
against him, whose name, but a short time before, had been the
theme of their loudest hosannas. There was now no need to
go into the past transactions of his ministry, for matter of
accusation. His friends might claim for him on that score all
that the warmest gratitude and love could inspire; and all this
could be safely conceded. But here, his accusers might say,
was a new and shocking crime, just perpetrated in the presence
of the most sacred tribunal; a crime so shocking, and so boldly
committed, that the high priest rent his clothes with horror, in
the very judgment seat, in the presence of all the members
<pb n='518'/><anchor id='Pg518'/>
of the Sanhedrim, who, with one accord, upon that evidence
alone, immediately convicted the offender and sentenced him
to death.
</p>

<p>
If we regard Jesus simply as a Jewish citizen, and with no
higher character, this conviction seems substantially right in
point of law, though the trial were not legal in all its forms.
For, whether the accusation were founded on the first or second
commands in the decalogue, or on the law, laid down in the
thirteenth chapter of Deuteronomy, or on that in the eighteenth
chapter and twentieth verse, he had violated them all, by assuming
to himself powers belonging alone to Jehovah. And even
if he were recognized as a prophet of the Lord, he was still
obnoxious to punishment, under the decision in the case of
Moses and Aaron, before cited. It is not easy to perceive on
what ground his conduct could have been defended before any
tribunal, unless upon that of his superhuman character. No
lawyer, it is conceived, would think of placing his defence upon
any other basis.
</p>

<p>
The great object of exciting the people against Jesus being
thus successfully accomplished, the next step was to obtain legal
authority to put him to death. For though the Sanhedrim had
condemned him, they had not the power to pass a capital
sentence; this being a right which had passed from the Jews
by the conquest of their country, and now belonged to the
Romans alone. They were merely citizens of a Roman province;
they were left in the enjoyment of their civil laws, the
public exercise of their religion, and many other things relating
to their police and municipal regulations; but they had not the
power of life and death. This was a principal attribute of
sovereignty, which the Romans always took care to reserve to
themselves in order to be able to reach those individuals who
might become impatient of the yoke, whatever else might be
neglected. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Apud quos (Romanos), vis imperii valet; inania
transmittuntur</foreign>.<note place='foot'><p>Tacit. Annal. xv. 31. See M. Dupin's Trial of Jesus, p. 57-59, (Amer. Ed.)
Chr. Thomasius, Dissertatio de injusto Pilati judicio, § 12, 60. The want of this
power was admitted by the Jews, in their reply to Pilate, when he required them to
judge Jesus according to their own law, and they replied, <q>It is not lawful for us to
put any man to  death.</q> John xviii. 31.
</p>
<p>
This point has been held in different ways by learned men. Some are of opinion
that the Sanhedrim had power to inflict death for offences touching religion, though
not for political offences; and that it was with reference to the charge of treason
that they said to Pilate what has just been cited from St. John. They say that,
though the Sanhedrim had convicted Jesus of blasphemy, yet they dared not execute
that sentence, for fear of a sedition of the people:&mdash;that they therefore craftily determined
to throw on Pilate the odium of his destruction, by accusing him of treason;
and hence, after condemning him, they consulted further, as stated in Matt. xxvii.
1, 2. Mark xv. 1, how to effect this design:&mdash;that when Pilate found no fault in
him, and directed them to take and crucify him, some replied, <q>We have a law, and
by our law he ought to die,</q> (John xix. 7,) to intimate to Pilate that Jesus was
guilty of death by the Jewish law also, as well as the Roman, and that therefore he
would not lose any popularity by condemning him. See Zorrius, Hist. Fisci Judaici,
ch. 2, § 2, (in Ugolini Thesaur. tom. 26, col. 1001-1003.) The same view is
taken by Deylingius, De Judæorum Jure Gladii, § 10, 11, 12, (in Ugolin. Thesaur.
tom. 29, col. 1189-1192.) But he concludes that in all capital cases, there was an
appeal from the Sanhedrim to the Prætor; and that without the approval of the
latter, the sentence of the Sanhedrim could not be executed. Ibid. § 15, col. 1196.
Molinæus understood the Jewish law in the same manner. See his Harmony of the
Gospels, note on John xviii. 31. C. Molinæi Opera, tom. 5. pp. 603, 604. But this
opinion is refuted by what is said by M. Dupin, Trial, &amp;c., § 8, and by Thomasius,
above cited.
</p></note> The jurisdiction of capital cases belonged
<pb n='519'/><anchor id='Pg519'/>
ordinarily to the governor general or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Præses</foreign> of a province, the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Procurator</foreign> having for his principal duty only the charge of the
revenue and the cognizance of revenue causes. But the right
of taking cognizance of capital crimes was, in some cases, given
to certain <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Procurators</foreign>, who were sent into small provinces, to
fill the places of governors, (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vice Præsides</foreign>,) as clearly appears
from the Roman laws. The government of all Syria was at this
time under a governor general, or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Præses</foreign>; of which Judea was
one of the lesser dependencies, under the charge of Pilate as
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vice Præses</foreign>, with capital jurisdiction.<note place='foot'>See M. Dupin's Trial of Jesus, pp. 55-62. His authorities are Loiseau, Godefroy,
and Cujas, the two latter of whom he cites as follows:&mdash;Procurator Cæsaris
<hi rend='italic'>fungens vice præsidis</hi> potest cognoscere <hi rend='italic'>de causis criminalibus</hi>. Godefroy, in his
note (letter S) upon the 3rd law of the code, <hi rend='italic'>Ibi causæ fiscales</hi>, &amp;c. And he cites
several others, which I have verified, and which are most precise to the same effect.
See particularly the 4th law of the Code, <hi rend='italic'>Ad. leg. fab. de plag.</hi>, and the 2nd law of the
Code, <hi rend='italic'>De Pœnis</hi>.&mdash;Procuratoribus Cæsaris data est jurisdictio in causis fiscalibus
pecuniariis, non in criminalibus, nisi quum fungebantur <hi rend='italic'>vice præsidum</hi>; ut Pontius
Pilatus fuit procurator Cæsaris <hi rend='italic'>vice præsidis</hi> in Syria. Cujas, Observ. xix. 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
It could not be expected that Pilate would trouble himself
<pb n='520'/><anchor id='Pg520'/>
with the cognizance of any matter, not pertaining to the
Roman law; much less with an alleged offence against the God
of the Jews, who was neither acknowledged nor even respected
by their conquerors. Of this the chief priests and elders were
fully aware; and therefore they prepared a second accusation
against Jesus, founded on the Roman law; as likely to succeed
with Pilate, as the former had done with the people. They
charged him with attempting to restore the kingdom of Israel,
under his own dominion as king of the Jews. <q>We found
this fellow, said they, perverting the nation, and forbidding to
give tribute to Cæsar, saying, That he himself is Christ, a
king.</q><note place='foot'>Luke xxiii. 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
It was a charge of high treason against the Roman state and
emperor; a charge which was clearly within Pilate's cognizance,
and which, as they well knew, no officer of Tiberius would
venture lightly to regard. Pilate accordingly forthwith arraigned
Jesus, and called upon him to answer this accusation.
It is worthy of note, that from the moment when he was
accused of treason before Pilate, no further allusion was made
to the previous charge of blasphemy; the Roman governor
being engaged solely with the charge newly preferred before
himself. The answer of Jesus to this charge satisfied Pilate
that it was groundless, the kingdom which he set up appearing
plainly to be not a kingdom of this world, but his spiritual reign
in righteousness and holiness and peace, in the hearts of men.
Pilate therefore acquitted him of the offence. <q>He went out
again unto the Jews, and saith unto them, <hi rend='italic'>I find in him no fault
at all</hi>.</q><note place='foot'>John xviii. 38.</note> Here was a sentence of acquittal, judicially pronounced,
and irreversible, except by a higher power, upon
appeal; and it was the duty of Pilate thereupon to have
discharged him. But the multitude, headed now by the priests
and elders, grew clamorous for his execution; adding, <q>He
stirreth up the people, teaching throughout all Jewry, beginning
from Galilee to this place.</q><note place='foot'>Luke xxiii. 5.</note> Hearing this reference to
Galilee, Pilate seized the opportunity, thus offered, of escaping
from the responsibility of a judgment, either of acquittal or of
<pb n='521'/><anchor id='Pg521'/>
condemnation, by treating the case as out of his jurisdiction,
and within that of Herod, tetrarch of Galilee, who was then in
Jerusalem on a visit. He therefore sent Jesus and his accusers
to Herod; before whom the charge was vehemently renewed
and urged. But Herod, too, perceived that it was utterly
groundless, and accordingly treated it with derision, arraying
Jesus in mock habiliments of royalty, and remanding him to
Pilate.<note place='foot'>Luke xxiii. 10, 11.</note> The cause was then solemnly re-examined by the
Roman governor, and a second judgment of acquittal pronounced.
For <q>Pilate, when he had called together the chief
priests and the rulers, and the people, said unto them, Ye have
brought this man unto me, as one that perverteth the people;
and behold, I having examined him before you, have found no
fault in this man, touching those things whereof ye accuse him:
No, nor yet Herod: for I sent you to him; and lo, nothing
worthy of death is done unto him. I will therefore chastise him
and release him.</q><note place='foot'>Luke xxiii. 13, 14, 15. I regard this judgement as conclusive evidence of the
innocence of the accused. Pilate's strenuous endeavour to release him instead of
Barabbas, and his solemn washing his own hands of the guilt of his blood, though
they show the strength of his own convictions, yet add no legal force to the judgement
itself.</note>
</p>

<p>
It may seem strange to us that after a judgment of acquittal
thus solemnly pronounced, any judge, in a civilized country,
should venture to reverse it, upon the same evidence, and
without the pretence of mistake or error in the proceedings.
Probably, in the settled jurisprudence of the city of Rome, it
could not have been done. But this was in a remote province
of the empire, under the administration not of a jurist, but a
soldier; and he, too, irresolute and vacillating; fearful for his
office, and even for his life, for he served the <q>dark and
unrelenting Tiberius.</q> As soon as he proposed to release
Jesus, <q>the Jews cried out, saying, If thou let this man go,
thou art not Cæsar's friend. Whosoever maketh himself a king,
speaketh against Cæsar.</q><note place='foot'>John xix. 12.</note> Whereupon <q>Pilate gave sentence
that it should be as they required.</q><note place='foot'>Luke xxiii. 24.</note> That Jesus was executed
under the pretence of treason, and that alone, is manifest from
<pb n='522'/><anchor id='Pg522'/>
the tenor of the writing placed over his head, stating that he
was king of the Jews; such being the invariable custom among
the Romans, in order that the public might know for what
crime the party had been condemned.<note place='foot'>See M. Dupin's Trial of Jesus, pp. 82-84.</note> The remaining act in
this tragedy is sufficiently known.
</p>

<p>
In the preceding remarks, the case has been considered only
upon its general merits, and with no reference to the manner in
which the proceedings were conducted. But M. Dupin, in his
tract on the Trial of Jesus before the Sanhedrim, in reply to
Mr. Salvador's account of it, has satisfactorily shown that
throughout the whole course of that trial the rules of the
Jewish law of procedure were grossly violated, and that the
accused was deprived of rights, belonging even to the meanest
citizen. He was arrested in the night, bound as a malefactor,
beaten before his arraignment, and struck in open court during
the trial; he was tried on a feast day, and before sunrise; he
was compelled to criminate himself, and this, under an oath or
solemn judicial adjuration; and he was sentenced on the same
day of the conviction. In all these particulars the law was
wholly disregarded.<note place='foot'>Ibid. 7-15. Jahn's Bibl. Ant. § 246.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='523'/><anchor id='Pg523'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Jewish Account Of The Trial Of Jesus.
By Mr. Salvador.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Mr. Joseph Salvador</hi>, a physician and a learned Jew, a few
years ago published at Paris, a work, entitled, <q>Histoire des
Institutions de Moïse et du Peuple Hébreu,</q> in which, among
other things, he gives an account of their course of criminal
procedure, in a chapter on <q>The Administration of Justice;</q>
which he illustrates, in a succeeding chapter, by an account of
the trial of Jesus. As this is the recent work of a man of
learning, himself a Jew, it may be regarded as an authentic
statement of what is understood and held by the most intelligent
and best informed Jews, respecting the claims of our Lord,
the tenor of his doctrines, the nature of the charge laid against
him before the Sanhedrim, and the grounds on which they condemned
him. The following translation of the last-mentioned
chapter will therefore not be unacceptable to the reader. It
will be found in Book IV. chapter iii., entitled, <q>The Trial and
Condemnation of Jesus.</q> The reader will bear in his mind,
that it is the language of an enemy of our Saviour, and in justification
of his murderers.
</p>

<p>
<q>According to this exposition of judicial proceedings,</q> says
the Jew, <q rend='pre'>I shall follow out the application of them in the most
memorable tried in history, that of Jesus Christ. I have already
explained the motives which have directed me, and the point of
view in which I have considered the subject; I have already
shown, that among the Jews no title was a shelter against a
prosecution and sentence. Whether the law or its forms were
good or bad, is not the object of my present investigation;
neither is it to ascertain whether we ought to pity the blindness
of the Hebrews in not discovering a Deity in Jesus, or to be
astonished that a God personified could not make himself comprehended
when he desired it. But since they regarded him
<pb n='524'/><anchor id='Pg524'/>
only as a citizen, did they not try him according to their law
and its existing forms? This is my question, which can admit
of no equivocation. I shall draw all my facts from the Evangelists
themselves, without inquiring whether all this history
was developed after the event, to serve as a form to a new doctrine,
or to an old one which had received a fresh impulse.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jesus was born of a family of small fortune; Joseph, his
supposed father, perceived that his wife was big before they had
come together. If he had brought her to trial, in the ordinary
course of things, Mary, according to the 23rd verse of the 22nd
chapter of Deuteronomy, would have been condemned, and
Jesus, having been declared illegitimate, could never, according
to the 2nd verse of the 23rd chapter, have been admitted to a
seat in the Sanhedrim.<note place='foot'>Deut. xxii. 22, and xxiii. 2. Selden, De Synedriis, lib. 3, cap. 4, 5.</note> But Joseph, who, to save his wife
from disgrace, had taken the resolution of sending her away
privately, soon had a dream which consoled him.<note place='foot'>Matt. i. 19, 20.</note>
</p>

<p>
After having been circumcised, Jesus grew like other men,
attended the solemn feasts, and early displayed surprising wisdom
and sagacity. In the assembly on the Sabbath, the Jews,
eager for the disputes to which the interpretation of the law
gave rise, loved to hear him. But he soon devoted himself to
more important labours; he pronounced censures against whole
towns, Capernaum, Chorazin and Bethsaida.<note place='foot'>Matt. xi. 20-24. Luke iv. &amp;c.</note> Recalling the
times of Isaiah and Jeremiah, he thundered against the chiefs
of the people with a vehemence which would in our day be
terrific.<note place='foot'>Matt. xxiii. per tot.</note> The people then regarded him as a prophet;<note place='foot'>Matt. xii. 11-46. John vii. 40.</note> they
heard him preach in towns and country without opposition;
they saw him surrounded with disciples according to the custom
of the learned men of the age; whatever may have been the
resentment of the chief men, they were silent as long as he
confined himself to the law.
</p>

<p>
But Jesus, in presenting new theories, and in giving new
forms to those already promulgated, speaks of himself as God;
his disciples repeat it; and the subsequent events prove in the
<pb n='525'/><anchor id='Pg525'/>
most satisfactory manner, that they thus understood him.<note place='foot'>The expression <hi rend='italic'>son of God</hi> was in common use among the Jews, to designate a
man of remarkable wisdom and piety. It was not in this sense that Jesus Christ
used it; for in that case it would have occasioned no great sensation.  Besides, if we
should assume, in order to make it a subject of accusation against these Jews, that
Jesus did not expressly declare himself to be God, we should be exposed to this
rejoinder: Why then do you believe in him?</note>
This was shocking blasphemy in the eyes of the citizens: the
law commands them to follow Jehovah alone, the only true
God; not to believe in gods of flesh and bone, resembling men
or women; neither to spare nor listen to a prophet who, even
doing miracles, should proclaim a new god, a god whom neither
they nor their fathers had known.<note place='foot'>See Deut. iv. 15, and xiii. per tot.</note>
</p>

<p>
Jesus having said to them one day: <q>I have come down
from heaven to do these things,</q> the Jews, who till then had
listened to him, murmured and cried: <q>Is not this Jesus, the
son of Joseph and of Mary? we know his father, his mother,
and his brethren; why then does he say that he has come down
from heaven?</q><note place='foot'>John vi. 39-42. Matt. xiii. 55.</note> On another day, the Jews, irritated from
the same cause, took stones and threatened him. Jesus said
unto them, <q>I have done good works in your eyes by the power
of my Father, for which of these works would you stone me?
It is for no good work,</q> replied the Jews, who stated the whole
process in few words, <q>but because of thy blasphemy; for being
a man,<note place='foot'>This fact is clearly established as possible; and we must observe that till
then there had been neither opposition nor enmity in the minds of this people, since
they had listened to him with the greatest attention, and did not hesitate to acknowledge
in him all that public law permitted them to do, viz., a prophet, a highly inspired man.</note> thou makest thyself God.</q><note place='foot'>John x. 30-33.</note>
</p>

<p>
His language was not always clear. Often his disciples
themselves did not comprehend him. Among his maxims,
some of which showed the greatest mildness, there were some
which the Hebrews, who were touched only through their natural
sense, thought criminal. <q>Think not that I am come to send
peace on earth; I came not to send peace, but a sword. For
I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the
<pb n='526'/><anchor id='Pg526'/>
daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law against
her mother-in-law. And a man's foes shall be they of his own
household. He that loveth father or mother more than me,
is not worthy of me.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. x. 34. Mark x. 29.</note> Finally, if he wrought miracles before
certain of the people, his replies to the questions of the doctors
were generally evasive.<note place='foot'>Matt. xvi. 1-4. John viii. 13-18.</note>
</p>

<p>
In regard to political relations, he caused dissensions.<note place='foot'>John vii. 43. Luke xxiii. 5.</note> A
great number of disorderly persons whom he had the design of
reclaiming, but who inspired dread in the national council,
attached themselves to him;<note place='foot'>Matt. ix. 10. Mark ii. 15. Luke xv. 1.</note> his discourse flattered them
inasmuch as he pronounced anathemas against riches. <q>Know,</q>
said he, <q>that it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of
a needle, than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xix. 24.</note>
In this state of affairs, the council deliberates; some are of
opinion that he should be regarded as a madman,<note place='foot'>John x. 20.</note> others say
that he seeks to seduce the people.<note place='foot'>John vii. 12.</note> Caiaphas, the high priest,
whose dignity compels him to defend the letter of the law,
observes that these dissensions would furnish an excuse to the
Romans for overwhelming Judea, and that the interests of the
whole nation must outweigh those of a single individual; he
constitutes himself the accuser of Jesus.<note place='foot'>John xi. 47-50.</note>
</p>

<p>
The order is given to seize him. But let us pause here upon
a fact of the highest importance. The senate did not begin by
actually seizing Jesus, as is now the practice; they begin by
giving, after some debate, an order that he should be seized.<note place='foot'>Matt. xxvi. 4. John xi. 53, 54.</note>
This decree is made public; it is known to all, especially to
Jesus. No opposition is offered to his passing the frontier: his
liberty depends entirely upon himself. This is not all; the
order for his arrest was preceded by a decree of admonition.
One day, Jesus having entered the temple, took upon himself
authority contrary to the common law; then he preached to
the people, and said: <q>That those who should believe in him
should be able to do all things, so that if they should say to a
<pb n='527'/><anchor id='Pg527'/>
mountain, remove thyself and cast thyself into the sea, it would
obey.</q> Then the chief priest and senators went to find him
and said to him, <q>By what authority doest thou these things?
who gave thee this power?</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xxi. 23.</note>
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile a traitor discloses the place whither the accused
had retired; the guards, authorized by the high priest and by
the elders,<note place='foot'>It will be recollected, that the senate held its sessions in one of the porticos of
the temple. At this time the high priest presided over the senate, so that the guards
of the high priest, of the elders and the temple, were no other than the legal militia.</note> hasten to seize him. One of his disciples, breaking
into open rebellion, with a stroke of his sword cuts off the ear
of one of them, and brings upon himself the reproof of his
master.<note place='foot'>John xviii. 10, 11.</note> As soon as Jesus is arrested, the zeal of the apostles
is extinguished; all forsake him.<note place='foot'>Mark xiv. 50.  Matt. xxvi. 56.</note> He is brought before the
grand council, where the priests sustain the accusation. The
witnesses testify, and they are numerous; for the deeds of which
he is accused were done in the presence of all the people. The
two witnesses whom St. Matthew and St. Mark accuse of
perjury, relate a discourse which St. John declares to be true,
with regard to the power which Jesus arrogates to himself.<note place='foot'>Matt. xxvi. 60, 61. And the last came two false witnesses, and said, this fellow
said, I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to build it in three days. Mark
xiv. 57, 58. And there arose certain and bare false witness against him, saying, We
heard him say, I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, and within three
days I will build another made without hands. John ii. 19, 21, 22. Jesus answered
and said unto them, Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.  But
he spake of the temple of his body. When, therefore, he was risen from the dead,
his disciples remembered that he had said this unto them; and they believed the
scripture, and the word which Jesus had said.</note>
Finally, the high priest addresses the accused, and says: <q>Is
it true that thou art Christ, that thou art the Son of God?</q>
<q>I am he,</q> replies Jesus; <q>you shall see me hereafter at the
right hand of the majesty of God, who shall come upon the
clouds of heaven.</q> At these words, Caiaphas rent his garments
in token of horror.<note place='foot'>I repeat that the expression <hi rend='italic'>son of God</hi>, includes here the idea of God himself;
the fact is already established, and all the subsequent events confirm it. Observe,
also, that I quote the narrative of only one of the parties to this great proceeding.</note> <q>You have heard him.</q> They deliberate.
</p>

<pb n='528'/><anchor id='Pg528'/>

<p>
The question already raised among the people was this: Has
Jesus become God? But the senate having adjudged that
Jesus, son of Joseph, born at Bethlehem, had profaned the
name of God by usurping it to himself, a mere citizen, applied
to him the law of blasphemy, and the law in the 13th chapter
of Deuteronomy, and the 20th verse in chapter 18, according
to which every prophet, even he who works miracles, must be
punished, when he speaks of a god unknown to the Jews and
their fathers:<note place='foot'>Deut. xxviii. 20. But the prophet, which shall presume to speak a word in my
name, which I have not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the name of
other gods, even that prophet shall die.</note> the capital sentence was pronounced. As to
the ill-treatment which followed the sentence, it was contrary
to the spirit of the Jewish law; and it is not in the course of
nature, that a senate composed of the most respectable men of
a nation, who, however they might have been deceived, yet
intended to act legally, should have permitted such outrages
against him whose life was at their disposal. The writers who
have transmitted to us these details, not having been present at
the trial, have been disposed to exaggerate the picture, either
on account of their prejudices, or to throw greater obloquy on
the judges.
</p>

<p>
One thing is certain, that the council met again on the
morning of the next day or the day following that,<note place='foot'>Matt. xxvii. 1. Mark xv. 1.</note> as the law
requires, to confirm or to annul the sentence: it was confirmed.
Jesus was brought before Pilate, the procurator that the
Romans had placed over the Jews. They had retained the
power of trying according to their own laws, but the executive
power was in the hands of the procurator alone: no criminal
could be executed without his consent: this was in order that
the Senate should not have the means of reaching men who
were sold to foreigners.<note place='foot'>The duties of Pilate were to inform himself whether the sentences given did or
did not affect the interests of Rome; there his part ended.  Thus it is not astonishing
that this procurator, doubtless little acquainted with the Jewish laws, signed the
decree for the arrest of Jesus, although he did not find him guilty.  We shall see
hereafter that there were then many parties among the Jews, among whom were the
Herodians or serviles, partisans of the house of Herod, and devoted to the foreign
interests.  These are they who speak continually of Cæsar, of rendering to Cæsar
the tribute due to Cæsar; they also insist that Jesus called himself <hi rend='italic'>king of the Jews</hi>,
but this charge was reckoned as nothing before the senate, and was not of a nature
alone to merit capital punishment.</note> Pilate, the Roman, signed the decree.
<pb n='529'/><anchor id='Pg529'/>
His soldiers, an impure mixture of diverse nations, were charged
with the punishment. These are they who brought Jesus to
the judgment hall, who stripped him before the whole cohort,
who placed upon his head a crown of thorns, and a reed in his
hand, who showed all the barbarity to which the populace in all
ages is disposed; who finally caused him to undergo a punishment
common at Rome, and which was not in use among the
Jews.<note place='foot'>See Matt. xxvii. 27. Mark xv. 16. John xix. 2.</note> But before the execution, the governor had granted to
the condemned an appeal to the people, who, respecting the
judgment of their own council, would not permit this favour,
couching their refusal in these terms: <q>We have a law; and
by our law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of
God.</q><note place='foot'>John xix. 7.</note> Then Pilate left them the choice of saving Jesus, or a
man accused of murder in a sedition; the people declared for
the latter; saying that the other would scatter the seeds of
discord in the bosom of the nation, at a time when union was
most necessary.<note place='foot'>The sending back of Jesus to Herod, which, according to the Gospel of St.
Luke, Pilate would have done, is not stated by the other Evangelists, and does not
at all change the judicial question.  Herod Antipas, tetrarch of Galilee, and of
Perea, had no authority in Jerusalem.  Upon his visit to this city, Pilate, according
to St. Luke, would, out of respect, have caused Jesus to appear before this ally
of the Romans, because Jesus was surnamed the Galilean, though originally from
Judea.  But to whatever tribe he belonged, the nature of the accusation would
still have required, according to the Hebrew law, that he should be judged by the
senate of Jerusalem.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q>Jesus was put to death. The priests and elders went to the
place of punishment; and as the sentence was founded upon
this fact, that he had unlawfully arrogated to himself the title
of Son of God, God himself, they appealed to him thus: <q>Thou
wouldst save others; thyself thou canst not save. If thou art
indeed the king of Israel, come down into the midst of us, and
we will believe in thee, since thou hast said, I am the Son of
God, let that God who loves thee come now to thine aid.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xvii. 42, 43.</note>
<pb n='530'/><anchor id='Pg530'/>
According to the Evangelist, these words were a mockery; but
the character of the persons who pronounced them, their
dignity, their age, the order which they had observed in the
trial, prove their good faith. Would not a miracle at this time
have been decisive?</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='531'/><anchor id='Pg531'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Trial Of Jesus Before Caiaphas And Pilate.</head>
<head type='sub'>Being A Refutation Of Mr. Salvador's Chapter Entitled
<q>The Trial And Condemnation Of Jesus.</q>
By M. Dupin. Translated From The French by John Pickering, LL.D.</head>

<pb n='533'/><anchor id='Pg533'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<p>
A few years ago, Mr. Joseph Salvador, a physician&mdash;and a descendant of
one of those Jewish families, whom the intolerance of Ferdinand the Catholic
expelled, in a body, from Spain, about the year 1492&mdash;published at Paris a
learned work, entitled <q>Histoire des Institutions de Moïse et du Peuple
Hébreu,</q> or History of the Institutions of Moses and the Hebrew People;
and in one chapter of his work he gives an account of the <hi rend='italic'>Administration of
Justice</hi> among the Hebrews. To that chapter he has subjoined an account of
the <q>Trial and Condemnation of Jesus;</q> in the course of which he expresses
his opinion, that the trial, considered merely <emph>as a legal proceeding</emph>, was conformable
to the Jewish laws.
</p>

<p>
The author of the following little work, M. Dupin, who is one of the most
eminent lawyers of the French Bar, immediately called in question the correctness
of Mr. Salvador's opinion, and entered upon an analysis of this portion
of his work, with a view to examine its soundness, and the present volume
contains the result of that examination, conducted with great legal skill and
extensive learning.
</p>

<p>
It appears, that he had, many years before, in a little work, entitled <q><hi rend='italic'>The
Free</hi> Defence of Accused Persons,</q> published in 1815, taken the same views
of this great trial; which, as he observes, has been justly called <q>the <hi rend='italic'>Passion</hi>
or <hi rend='italic'>Suffering</hi> of our Saviour; for he did in truth <emph>suffer</emph>, and had not a trial.</q>
</p>

<p>
The author's attention, however, had been withdrawn from this subject for
several years, when it was again brought under his notice by the work of Mr.
Salvador, a copy of which was sent to him by that writer, with a request that
M. Dupin would give some account of it. Accordingly, says the latter, <q>it is
in compliance with <emph>his request</emph>, and not from a spirit of hostility, that I have
made this examination of his work;</q> and he gives ample proof of his good
feeling towards Mr. Salvador, with whom, he says, he is personally acquainted
and for whose talents he has a great respect.
</p>

<p>
With this friendly spirit he enters upon his examination; which is conducted
with an ability, learning, animation, and interest, that leave nothing to
be desired. As an argument, his work is unanswerable,&mdash;he has demolished
that of his adversary; and, for intense interest, we do not know any publication
of the present day to be compared with it.
</p>

<pb n='534'/><anchor id='Pg534'/>

<p>
The introductory <emph>Analysis</emph> of Mr. Salvador's chapter on the Administration
of Justice according to the Jewish Law will be highly instructive and interesting;
and those persons, who have not been accustomed to read the Bible with
particular reference to the <emph>Law</emph>, will find many new and striking views of that
portion of the Scriptures. They cannot fail to be particularly struck with the
extraordinary care taken to secure by law the personal liberty and rights of
the citizen.
</p>

<p>
According to Mr. Salvador's view, <q>the fundamental division into <emph>castes</emph> is
the principal basis of the oriental theocracies.</q> Moses, on the contrary, took
for his basis the <emph>unity</emph> of the people. In his system of legislation the people
are every thing; and the author shows us, that every thing, eventually, is
done for them, by them, and with them. The tribe of Levi was established,
only to supply a secondary want; and that tribe was very far from obtaining
all the powers which we are apt to attribute to it; it did not make, nor
develope the laws; it did not judge or govern; all its members, even the high
priest himself, were subject to the control of the Elders of the nation, or of
a Senate legally assembled.
</p>

<p>
Intimately connected with these rights of the people was the <emph>liberty of
speech</emph>; and Mr. Salvador, in his chapter on the <hi rend='italic'>Public Orators and Prophets</hi>,
maintains, and in the opinion of M. Dupin, proves clearly, that in no nation
was the liberty of speech ever so unlimited, as among the Hebrews. Accordingly
he observes&mdash;<q>What an additional difference was this between the
Israelites and the Egyptians! Among the latter, the mass of the people did
not dare, without incurring the hazard of the most terrible punishment, to
utter a word on affairs of state; it was Harpocrates, the god of silence with
his finger on his closed lips, who was their God; in Israel, it was <emph>the right of
speech</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
But we forbear any further reflections, and submit this remarkable performance
to our readers. Those, who are familiar with the animated tone of
French writers, will perhaps discover in this translation some loss of the fire
and intensity of the original; but the translator's purpose will be effected, if
his version shall be found to be a faithful one.
</p>

<p>
September 3, 1839.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='535'/><anchor id='Pg535'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Analysis Of The Chapter Of Mr. Salvador, Entitled <q>The Administration
Of Justice</q> Among The Jews.<note place='foot'>This Analysis first appeared in the <hi rend='italic'>Gazette des Tribunaux</hi>.</note></head>

<p>
Mr. Salvador has discussed with particular care whatever
relates to the <emph>administration of justice</emph> among the Jewish people.
We shall dwell upon this chapter, which undoubtedly will most
interest our readers.
</p>

<p>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Judicare</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>judicari</foreign>, to judge and to be judged, express the
rights of every Hebrew citizen; that is, no one could be condemned
without a judgment, and every one might, in his turn,
be called upon to sit in judgment upon others. Some exceptions
to this principle are explained; but they do not affect
the rule. In matters of mere interest each party chose a judge,
and these two chose a third person. If a discussion arose as to
<emph>the interpretation of a law</emph>, they carried it to the lower council of
Elders, and from thence to the Great council at Jerusalem.
Each town of more than one hundred and twenty families was
to have its lower council, consisting of twenty-three members;
and these had jurisdiction in criminal cases.
</p>

<p>
The expressions, <hi rend='italic'>he shall die, he shall be cut off from the people</hi>,
which are so often used in the Mosaic law, embrace three very
different significations, which we are accustomed to confound.
They indicate the suffering of death as a punishment, civil
death, and that premature death, with which an individual is
naturally threatened, who departs from those rules which are
useful to the nation and to the individual himself. Civil death
is the last degree of <hi rend='italic'>separation</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>excommunication</hi>; it is pronounced,
as a judicial punishment, by the assembly of the judges.
</p>

<pb n='536'/><anchor id='Pg536'/>

<p>
There were three kinds of separation; which Mr. Salvador
compares to the three degrees of civil excommunication provided
for in the French Penal Code, and which condemn the criminal
to hard labour either for life or for a term of years, or to certain
correctional punishments. But the Hebrew excommunication
had this advantage, that the party <emph>never lost all hope of regaining
his original standing</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The Hebrew lawyers, in relation to the punishment of death,
maintained opinions, which deserve to be quoted:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>A tribunal, which condemns to death <emph>once in seven years</emph>,
may be called <hi rend='italic'>sanguinary</hi>.</q>&mdash;<q>It deserves this appellation, says
doctor Eliezer, when it pronounces a like sentence once in
seventy years.</q>&mdash;<q>If we had been members of the high court,
say the doctors Tyrphon and Akiba, we should never have condemned
a man to death.</q> Simeon, the son of Gamaliel, replied&mdash;<q>Would
not that be an abuse? Would you not have
been afraid of multiplying crimes in Israel?</q> Mr. Salvador
answers&mdash;<q>No, certainly; far from lessening their number, the
severity of the punishment increases it, by giving a more resolute
character to the men who are able to brave it; and, at the
present day, how many intelligent minds range themselves on
the side of Akiba and Tyrphon! How many consciences refuse
to participate, in any manner, in the death of a man! The
flowing of blood, the multitude excited by an unbecoming
curiosity, the victim dragged in triumph to the horrible altar,
the impossibility of repairing a mistake, (from which human
wisdom is never exempt), the dread of one day seeing a departed
shade rising up and saying, <q><hi rend='italic'>I was innocent</hi>,</q> the facility which
modern nations have of expelling from among them the man
whose presence pollutes them&mdash;the influence of general depravity
on the production of crimes&mdash;and finally the absurd contrast of
the whole of society, while in possession of strength, intelligence,
and arms, opposing itself to an individual wretch (who has been
drawn on by want, by passion, or by ignorance) and yet finding
no other means of redress than by exceeding him in cruelty&mdash;all
these things, and many others, have so deeply penetrated the
minds of all ranks of people, that there will one day proceed
from them the most striking proof of the power of morals over
<pb n='537'/><anchor id='Pg537'/>
the laws; for the law will be changed by the simple fact, that
we shall not find any person who will consent to apply it.</q>
</p>

<p>
I feel honoured in having maintained the same opinion in my
<hi rend='italic'>Observations on Criminal Legislation</hi>; but I solicit those, who
wish to see this question discussed in its whole extent, to read
the profound reflections which the Duke de Broglie has just
published on the subject, in the last number of the <hi rend='italic'>Revue
Française</hi> (for October, 1828.)
</p>

<p>
The whole criminal procedure in the Pentateuch rests upon
three principles, which may be thus expressed; publicity of the
trial, entire liberty of defence allowed to the accused; and a
guaranty against the dangers of testimony. According to the
Hebrew text <emph>one</emph> witness is no witness; there must be at least
two or three who know the fact. The witness, who testifies
against a man, must swear that he speaks the truth; the judges
then proceed to take exact information of the matter; and, if it
is found that the witness has sworn falsely, they compel him
to undergo the punishment to which he would have exposed his
neighbour. The discussion between the accuser and the accused
is conducted before the whole assembly of the people. When a
man is condemned to death, those witnesses whose evidence
decided the sentence inflict the first blows, in order to add the
last degree of certainty to their evidence. Hence the expression&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Let
him among you, who is without sin, cast the first stone</hi>.
</p>

<p>
If we pursue their application of these fundamental rules in
practice, we shall find that a trial proceeded in the following
manner.
</p>

<p>
On the day of the trial, the executive officers of justice caused
the accused person to make his appearance. At the feet of the
Elders were placed men who, under the name of <hi rend='italic'>auditors</hi>, or
<hi rend='italic'>candidates</hi>, followed regularly the sittings of the Council. The
papers in the case were read; and the witnesses were called in
succession. The president addressed this exhortation to each of
them: <q>It is not conjectures, or whatever public rumour has
brought to thee, that we ask of thee; consider that a great
responsibility rests upon thee: that we are not occupied by an
affair, like a case of pecuniary interest, in which the injury may
be repaired. If thou causest the condemnation of a person unjustly
<pb n='538'/><anchor id='Pg538'/>
accused, his blood, and the blood of all the posterity of
him, of whom thou wilt have deprived the earth, will fall upon
thee; God will demand of thee an account, as he demanded of
Cain an account of the blood of Abel. Speak.</q>
</p>

<p>
A woman could not be a witness, because she would not have
the courage to give the first blow to the condemned person;
nor could a child, that is irresponsible, nor a slave, nor a man
of bad character, nor one whose infirmities prevent the full
enjoyment of his physical and moral faculties. <emph>The simple confession
of an individual against himself</emph>, or the declaration of a
prophet, however renowned, would not decide a condemnation.
The Doctors say&mdash;<q>We hold it as fundamental, that <emph>no one shall
prejudice himself</emph>. If a man accuses himself before a tribunal,
we must not believe him, unless the fact is attested by two other
witnesses; and it is proper to remark, that the punishment of
death inflicted upon Achan, in the time of Joshua<note place='foot'>Joshua vii. 19, &amp;c.</note> was an exception,
occasioned by the nature of the circumstances; for our
law does not condemn upon the simple confession of the accused,
nor upon the declaration of one prophet alone.</q>
</p>

<p>
The witnesses were to attest to the identity of the party, and
to depose to the month, day, hour, and circumstances of the
crime. After an examination of the proofs, those judges who
believed the party innocent stated their reasons; those who
believed him guilty spoke afterwards, and <emph>with the greatest
moderation</emph>. If one of the <emph>auditors</emph>, or <emph>candidates</emph>, was entrusted
by the accused with his defence, or if he wished in his own name
to present any elucidations in favour of innocence, he was
admitted to the seat, from which he addressed the judges and
the people. But this liberty was not granted to him, if his
opinion was in favour of condemning. Lastly; when the accused
person himself wished to speak, they gave the most profound
attention. When the discussion was finished, one of the judges
recapitulated the case; they removed all the spectators; two
scribes took down the votes of the judges; one of them noted
those which were in favour of the accused, and the other, those
which condemned him. Eleven votes, out of twenty-three, were
sufficient to acquit; but it required thirteen to convict. If any
<pb n='539'/><anchor id='Pg539'/>
of the judges stated that they were not sufficiently informed,
there were added two more Elders, and then two others in succession,
till they formed a council of sixty-two, which was the
number of the Grand Council. If a majority of votes acquitted,
the accused was discharged <emph>instantly</emph>; if he was to be punished,
the judges postponed pronouncing sentence till the third day;
during the intermediate day they could not be occupied with
anything but the cause, and they abstained from eating freely,
and from wine, liquors, and everything which might render
their minds less capable of reflection.
</p>

<p>
On the morning of the third day they returned to the
judgment seat. Each judge, who had not changed his opinion,
said, <hi rend='italic'>I continue of the same opinion and condemn</hi>; any one, who
at first condemned, might at this sitting acquit; but he who
had once acquitted was not allowed to condemn. If a majority
condemned, two <emph>magistrates</emph> immediately accompanied the
condemned person to the place of punishment. The Elders did
not descend from their seats; they placed at the entrance of the
judgment hall an officer of justice with a small flag in his hand;
a second officer, on horseback, followed the prisoner, and
constantly kept looking back to the place of departure. During
this interval, if any person came to announce to the Elders any
new evidence favourable to the prisoner, the first officer waved
his flag, and the second one, as soon as he perceived it, brought
back the prisoner. If the prisoner declared to the <emph>magistrates</emph>,
that he recollected some reasons which had escaped him, they
brought him before the <emph>judges</emph> no less than five times. If no
incident occurred, the procession advanced slowly, preceded by
a herald who, in a loud voice, addressed the people thus: <q>This
man (stating his name and surname) is led to punishment for
such a crime; the witnesses who have sworn against him are
such and such persons; if any one has evidence to give in his
favour, let him come forth quickly.</q>
</p>

<p>
It was in consequence of this rule that the youthful Daniel
caused the procession to go back, which was leading Susanna to
punishment, and he himself ascended the seat of justice to put
some new questions to the witnesses.
</p>

<p>
At some distance from the place of punishment, they urged
<pb n='540'/><anchor id='Pg540'/>
the prisoner to confess his crime, and they made him drink a
stupefying beverage, in order to render the approach of death
less terrible.<note place='foot'>By this, says Father Lamy, we may understand what the mixture of wine and
myrrh was, which they presented to Jesus on the cross, and which he would not
drink. <hi rend='italic'>Introd. to the reading of the Holy Scriptures</hi>, chap. vi. (<hi rend='italic'>Note of Mr. Salvador</hi>,
Book iv. ch. 2.)</note>
</p>

<p>
By this mere analysis of a part of Mr. Salvador's work we
may judge of the extreme interest of the whole. His principal
object has been, to make apparent the mutual aids which history,
philosophy, and legislation afford in explaining the institutions of
the Jewish people. His book is a scientific work, and at the same
time a work of taste. His notes indicate vast reading; and in
the choice of his citations he gives proofs of his critical skill and
discrimination. Mr. Salvador belongs, by his age, to that new
generation, which is distinguished as much by its application to
solid studies, as by elevation and generosity of sentiment.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='541'/><anchor id='Pg541'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Trial Of Jesus.</head>
<head type='sub'>Refutation Of The Chapter Of Mr. Salvador, Entitled
<q>The Trial And Condemnation Of Jesus.</q></head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The chapter, in which Mr. Salvador treats of <hi rend='italic'>the Administration
of Justice among the Hebrews</hi>, is altogether theoretical.
He makes an exposition of the law&mdash;that things, in order to be
<hi rend='italic'>conformable to rule</hi>, must be transacted in a certain mode. In
all this I have not contradicted him, but have let him speak for
himself.</q>
</p>

<p>
In the subsequent chapter the author announces: <q>That
according to this <hi rend='italic'>exposition of judicial proceedings</hi> he is going to
follow out the application of them to the most memorable trial
in all history, that of Jesus Christ.</q> Accordingly the chapter
is entitled: <hi rend='italic'>The Trial and Condemnation of Jesus</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The author first takes care to inform us under what point of
view he intends to give an account of that accusation: <q>That
we ought to lament the blindness of the Hebrews for not having
recognised a God in Jesus, is a point which I do not examine.</q>
(There is another thing also, which he says he shall not examine.)
<q>But, when they discovered in him <hi rend='italic'>only a citizen</hi>, did they try
him <hi rend='italic'>according to existing laws and formalities</hi>?</q>
</p>

<p>
The question being thus stated, Mr. Salvador goes over all
the various aspects of the accusation; and his conclusion is, that
the procedure was perfectly regular, and the condemnation
perfectly appropriate to the act committed. <q>Now,</q> says he,
(p. 87,) <q>the Senate, having adjudged that Jesus, the son of
Joseph, born in Bethlehem, had profaned the name of God
by usurping it himself, though a simple citizen, applied to him
<pb n='542'/><anchor id='Pg542'/>
the law against blasphemy, the law in the 13th chapter of
Deuteronomy, and verse 20, chapter 18th, conformably to which
every prophet, even one that performs miracles, is to be punished
when he speaks of a God unknown to the Hebrews or their
fathers.</q>
</p>

<p>
This conclusion is formed to please the followers of the
Jewish law; it is wholly for their benefit, and the evident object
is, to justify them from the reproach of <hi rend='italic'>deïcide</hi>.
</p>

<p>
We will, however, avoid treating this grave subject in a
theological point of view. As to myself, Jesus Christ is the
<hi rend='italic'>Man-God</hi>; but it is not with arguments drawn from my religion
and my creed, that I intend to combat the statement and the
conclusion of Mr. Salvador. The present age would charge me
with being intolerant; and this is a reproach which I will never
incur. Besides, I do not wish to give to the enemies of
Christianity the advantage of making the outcry, that we are
afraid to enter into a discussion with them, and that we wish to
crush rather than to convince them. Having thus contented
myself with declaring my own faith, as Mr. Salvador has let us
clearly understand his, I shall also examine the question under
a merely <emph>human</emph> point of view, and proceed to inquire, with him,
<q>Whether Jesus Christ, considered <emph>as a simple citizen</emph>, was
tried according to the existing laws and formalities.</q>
</p>

<p>
The catholic religion itself warrants me in this; it is not a
mere fiction; for God willed, that Jesus should be clothed in
the forms of humanity (<hi rend='italic'>et homo factus est</hi>), and that he should
undergo the lot and sufferings of humanity. The <hi rend='italic'>son of God</hi>,
as to his moral state and his holy spirit, he was also, in reality,
the <hi rend='italic'>Son of Man</hi>, for the purpose of accomplishing the mission
which he came upon earth to fulfil.
</p>

<p>
This being the state of the question, then, I enter upon my
subject; and I do not hesitate to affirm, because I will prove it,
that, upon examining all the circumstances of this great trial,
we shall be very far from discovering in it the application of
those legal maxims, which are the safeguard of the rights of
accused persons, and of which Mr. Salvador, in his chapter <hi rend='italic'>On
the Administration of Justice</hi>, has made a seductive exposition.
</p>

<p>
The accusation of Jesus, instigated by the hatred of the
<pb n='543'/><anchor id='Pg543'/>
priests and the Pharisees, and presented at first as a charge of
<hi rend='italic'>sacrilege</hi>, but afterwards converted into a <hi rend='italic'>political</hi> crime and <hi rend='italic'>an
offence against the state</hi>, was marked, in all its aspects, with the
foulest acts of violence and perfidy. It was not so much <emph>a trial</emph>
environed with legal forms, as a real <emph>passion</emph>, or prolonged
suffering, in which the imperturbable gentleness of the victim
displays more strongly the unrelenting ferocity of his persecutors.
</p>

<p>
When Jesus appeared among the Jews, that people was but
the shadow of itself. Broken down by more than one subjugation,
divided by factions and irreconcilable sects, they had in
the last resort been obliged to succumb to the Roman power
and surrender their own sovereignty. Jerusalem, having
become a mere appendage to the province of Syria, saw within
its walls an imperial garrison; Pilate commanded there, in the
name of Cæsar; and the late people of God were groaning
under the double tyranny of a conqueror, whose power they
abhorred and whose idolatry they detested, and of a priesthood
that exerted itself to keep them under the rigorous bonds of a
religious fanaticism.
</p>

<p>
Jesus Christ deplored the misfortunes of his country. How
often did he weep for Jerusalem! Read in Bossuet's <hi rend='italic'>Politics
drawn from the Holy Scriptures</hi>, the admirable chapter entitled,
<hi rend='italic'>Jesus Christ the good citizen</hi>. He recommended to his countrymen
<emph>union</emph>, which constitutes the strength of states. <q>O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, (said he,) thou that killest the prophets
and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I
have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth
her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!</q>
</p>

<p>
He was supposed to be not favorable to the Romans; but he
only loved his own countrymen more. Witness the address of
the Jews, who, in order to induce him to restore to the centurion
a sick servant that was dear to him, used as the most powerful
argument these words&mdash;that he was worthy for whom he should
do this, for he loveth our nation. And Jesus went with them.
Luke vii. 4, 5.
</p>

<p>
Touched with the distresses of the nation, Jesus comforted
them by holding up to them the hope of another life; he
alarmed the great, the rich, and the haughty, by the prospect of
<pb n='544'/><anchor id='Pg544'/>
a final judgment, at which every man would be judged not
according to his rank, but his works. He was desirous of again
bringing back man to his original dignity; he spoke to him of
his <emph>duties</emph>, but at the same time of his <emph>rights</emph>. The people heard
him with avidity, and followed him with eagerness; his words
affected them; his hand healed their diseases, and his moral
teaching instructed them; he preached, and practised one virtue
till then unknown, and which belongs to him alone&mdash;<emph>charity</emph>.
This celebrity, however, and these wonders excited envy. The
partisans of the <emph>ancient theocracy</emph> were alarmed at the <emph>new
doctrine</emph>; the chief priests felt that their power was threatened;
the pride of the Pharisees was humbled; the scribes came in as
their auxiliaries, and the destruction of Jesus was resolved upon.
</p>

<p>
Now, if his conduct was reprehensible, if it afforded grounds
for a <emph>legal accusation</emph>, why was not that course taken openly?
Why not try him for the acts committed by him, and for his
public discourses? Why employ against him subterfuges,
artifice, perfidy, and violence? for such was the mode of proceeding
against Jesus.
</p>

<p>
Let us now take up the subject, and look at the narratives
which have come down to us. Let us, with Mr. Salvador, open
the books of the Gospels; for he does not object to that testimony;
nay, he relies upon it: <q>It is by the Gospels themselves,</q>
says he, <q>that I shall establish <emph>all the facts</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
In truth, how can we (except by contrary evidence, of which
there is none) refuse to place confidence in an historian, who tells
us, as Saint John does, with affecting simplicity: <q>He that saw
it bare record, and his record is true, and he knoweth that he
saith true, that ye might believe.</q> John xix. 35.
</p>

<p>
Section I.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Spies, or Informers</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Who will not be surprised to find in this case the odious
practice of employing hired informers? Branded with infamy,
as they are in modern times, they will be still more so when we
carry back their origin to the trial of Christ. It will be seen
presently, whether I have not properly characterized by the
<pb n='545'/><anchor id='Pg545'/>
name of hired informers those emissaries, whom the chief priests
sent out to be about Jesus.
</p>

<p>
We read in the evangelist Luke, chap. xx. 20: <hi rend='italic'>Et observantes
miserunt insidiatores, qui se justos simularent, ut caperent eum in
sermone, et traderent illum principatui et potestati præsidis</hi>. I will
not translate this text myself, but will take the language of a
translator whose accuracy is well known, Mr. De Sacy: <q>As
they only sought occasions for his destruction, they sent to him
<hi rend='italic'>apostate persons who feigned themselves just men</hi>, in order to <hi rend='italic'>take
hold</hi> of his words, that they might deliver him unto magistrate
and into the power of the governor.</q> And Mr. De Sacy
adds&mdash;<q>if there should escape from him the least word against
the public authorities.</q>
</p>

<p>
This first artifice has escaped the sagacity of Mr. Salvador.
</p>

<p>
Section II.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Corruption and Treachery of Judas</hi>.
</p>

<p>
According to Mr. Salvador, the senate, as he calls it, did not
commence their proceedings by arresting Jesus, as would be
done at the present day; but they began by passing a preliminary
decree, that he should be arrested; and he cites, in proof
of his assertion, St. John xi. 53, 54, and St. Matthew xxvi. 4, 5.
</p>

<p>
But St. John says nothing of this pretended decree. He
speaks, too, not of a public sitting, but of a consultation held
by the chief priests and the <hi rend='italic'>Pharisees</hi>, who did not, to my knowledge,
constitute a judicial tribunal among the Jews. <q>Then
gathered the chief priests and the Pharisees a council, and said,
What do we? for this man <hi rend='italic'>doeth many miracles</hi>.</q> John xi. 47.
They add: <q>If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on
him,</q>&mdash;which imported also, in their minds, <hi rend='italic'>and they will no
longer believe in us</hi>. Now, in this, I can readily perceive the
fear of seeing the morals and doctrines of Jesus prevail; but
where is the preliminary <hi rend='italic'>judgment</hi>, or decree? I cannot discover
it.
</p>

<p>
<q>And one of them, named Caiaphas, being the high priest
that same year, said unto them, Ye know nothing at all, nor
<pb n='546'/><anchor id='Pg546'/>
consider, that it is expedient for us, that one man should die
for the people ... and he <hi rend='italic'>prophesied</hi>, that Jesus should die
for the nation of the Jews.</q> But to <hi rend='italic'>prophesy</hi> is not to <hi rend='italic'>pass
judgment</hi>; and the individual opinion of Caiaphas, who was only
one among them, was not the opinion of all, nor a <hi rend='italic'>judgment of
the senate</hi>. We, therefore, still find a <hi rend='italic'>judgment</hi> wanting; and
we only observe, that the priests and Pharisees are stimulated
by a violent hatred of Jesus, and that <q>from that day forth they
took counsel together for <hi rend='italic'>to put him to death; ut interficerent
eum</hi>.</q> John xi. 53.
</p>

<p>
The authority of St. John, then, is directly in contradiction
of the assertion, that there was an <hi rend='italic'>order of arrest</hi> previously
passed by a regular tribunal.
</p>

<p>
St. Matthew, in relating the same facts, says, that the chief
priests assembled at the palace of the high priest, who was called
Caiaphas, and there held counsel together. But what counsel?
and what was the result of it? Was it to issue an <hi rend='italic'>order of arrest</hi> against Jesus, that they might hear him and then pass sentence?
Not at all; but they held counsel together, <q>that they might
take Jesus <hi rend='italic'>by subtilty</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>fraud</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>kill him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>concilium fecerunt</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>ut Jesum</hi> DOLO <hi rend='italic'>tenerent et</hi> OCCIDERENT. Matt. xxvi. 5. Now in the
Latin language, a language perfectly well constituted in everything
relating to terms of the law, the words <hi rend='italic'>occidere</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>interficere</hi>
were never employed to express the act of passing <hi rend='italic'>sentence</hi>,
or <hi rend='italic'>judgment of death</hi>, but simply to signify <hi rend='italic'>murder</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>assassination</hi>.<note place='foot'>As was that of Stephen, whom the same priests caused to be massacred by the
populace, without a previous sentence of the law. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Occidere</hi>: Non occides, thou
shalt not kill. <hi rend='italic'>Deut</hi>. v. 17. Veneno homines occidere. Cic. pro Roscio, 61.
Virginiam filiam sua manu occidit Virginius. Cic. de Finib. 107. Non hominem
occidi. Horat. I. Epist. 17, 10. Inermem occidere. Ovid. ii. Fast. 139. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Interficere</hi>:
Feras interficere. Lucret. lib. v. 251. Interfectus in acie. Cic. de Finib.
103. Cæsaris interfectores. Brutus Ciceroni, 16, 8. Interfectorem Gracchi. Cic.
de Claris Orrato. 66.</note>
</p>

<p>
This <emph>fraud</emph>, by the aid of which they were to get Jesus into
their power, was nothing but the bargain made between the
chief priests and Judas.
</p>

<p>
Judas, one of the twelve, goes to find the chief priests, and
says to them, What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto
you? Matt. xxvi. 14, 15. And they covenanted with him for
thirty pieces of silver! Jesus, who foresaw his treachery, warned
<pb n='547'/><anchor id='Pg547'/>
him of it mildly, in the midst of the Last Supper, where the voice
of his master, in the presence of his brethren, should have
touched him and awakened his reflections! But not so; wholly
absorbed in his reward, Judas placed himself at the head of a
gang of servants, to whom he was to point out Jesus; and, then,
by a <emph>kiss</emph> consummated his treachery!<note place='foot'>Will it be believed, that Tertullian and St. Irenæus were obliged to refute
seriously some writers of their day, who considered the conduct of Judas not only
excusable, but worthy of admiration and highly meritorious, <q>because (as they said)
of the immense service which he had rendered to the human race by <emph>preparing their
redemption!</emph></q> In the same manner, at a certain period, we have seen plunderers of
the public money make a merit of their conduct, because in that way they had
weakened the usurpation and prepared the way for the triumph of legitimacy.</note>
</p>

<p>
Is it thus that a <emph>judicial decree was to be executed</emph>, if there
had really been one made for the arrest of Jesus?
</p>

<p>
Section III.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Personal Liberty.&mdash;Resistance
to an Armed Force</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The act was done in the night time. After having celebrated
the Supper, Jesus had conducted his disciples to the Mount of
Olives. He prayed fervently; but they fell asleep.
</p>

<p>
Jesus awakes them, with a gentle reproof for their weakness,
and warns them that the moment is approaching. <q>Rise, let
us be going; behold he is at hand that doth betray me.</q> Matt.
xxvi. 46.
</p>

<p>
Judas was not alone; in his suite there was a kind of ruffian
band, almost entirely composed of servants of the high priest,
but whom Mr. Salvador honours with the title of the <emph>legal
soldiery</emph>. If in the crowd there were any Roman <emph>soldiers</emph>, they
were there as spectators, and without having been legally called
on duty; for the Roman commanding officer, Pilate, had not
yet heard the affair spoken of.
</p>

<p>
This personal seizure of Jesus had so much the appearance
of a forcible arrest, an illegal act of violence, that his disciples
made preparation to repel force by force.
</p>

<p>
Malchus, the insolent servant of the high priest, having
<pb n='548'/><anchor id='Pg548'/>
shown himself the most eager to rush upon Jesus, Peter, not
less zealous for his own master, cut off the servant's right ear.
</p>

<p>
This resistance might have been continued with success, if
Jesus had not immediately interfered. But what proves that
Peter, even while causing bloodshed, was not resisting a <emph>legal
order</emph>, a <emph>legal judgment</emph> or decree, (which would have made his
resistance an act of <emph>rebellion by an armed force against a judicial
order</emph>,) is this&mdash;that he was not arrested, either at the moment
or afterwards, at the house of the high priest, to which he followed
Jesus, and where he was most distinctly recognised by
the maid servant of the high priest, and even by a relative of
Malchus.
</p>

<p>
Jesus alone was arrested; and although he had not individually
offered any active resistance, and had even restrained that
of his disciples, they bound him as a malefactor; which was a
criminal degree of rigour, since for the purpose of securing a
single man by a numerous band of persons armed with swords
and staves it was not necessary. <q>Be ye come out as against
a thief with swords and staves?</q> Luke xxii. 52.
</p>

<p>
Section IV.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Other Irregularities in the
Arrest.&mdash;Seizure of the Person</hi>.
</p>

<p>
They dragged Jesus along with them; and, instead of taking
him directly to the proper magistrate, they carried him before
Annas, who had no other character than that of being <hi rend='italic'>father-in-law
to the high priest</hi>. John xviii. 13. Now, if this was only
for the purpose of letting him be seen by him, such a curiosity
was not to be gratified; it was a vexatious proceeding, an irregularity.
</p>

<p>
From the house of Annas they led him to that of the high
priest; all this time being <emph>bound</emph>. John xviii. 24. They placed
him in the court yard; it was cold, and they made a fire; it
was in the night time, but by the light of the fire Peter was
recognised by the people of the palace.
</p>

<p>
Now the Jewish law prohibited <hi rend='italic'>all proceedings by night</hi>;
here, therefore, there was another infraction of the law.
</p>

<pb n='549'/><anchor id='Pg549'/>

<p>
Under this state of things, his person being forcibly seized
and detained in a private house, and delivered into the hands of
servants, in the midst of a court, how was Jesus treated? St.
Luke says, the men that held Jesus <hi rend='italic'>mocked</hi> him and <hi rend='italic'>smote</hi> him;
and when they had blindfolded him, they struck him on the
face, and asked him, saying, Prophesy, who is it that smote
thee? And many other things blasphemously spake they
against him. Luke xxii. 63, 64, 65.
</p>

<p>
Will it be said, as Mr. Salvador does, that all this took place
out of the presence of the senate? Let us wait, in this instance,
till the senate shall be called up, and we shall see how
far they protected the accused person.
</p>

<p>
Section V.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Captious Interrogatories.&mdash;Acts
of Violence towards Jesus</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Already had the cock crowed! But it was not yet day.
The elders of the people and the chief priests and the scribes
came together, and, having caused Jesus to appear before their
council, they proceeded to interrogate him. Luke xxii. 66.
</p>

<p>
Now, in the outset, it should be observed, that if they had
been less carried away by their hatred, they should, as it was the
<hi rend='italic'>night time</hi>, not only have postponed, but put a stop to the proceedings,
because it was <hi rend='italic'>the feast of the Passover</hi>, the most
solemn of all festivals; and according to their law no <hi rend='italic'>judicial
procedure</hi> could take place on a feast-day, under the penalty of
being null.<note place='foot'>See, as to these two grounds of nullity, the Jewish authors cited by Prost de
Royer, tome 2, p. 205, <hi rend='italic'>verbo</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Accusation</hi>.</note> Nevertheless, let us see who proceeded to interrogate
Jesus. This was that same Caiaphas, who, if he had
intended to remain a <hi rend='italic'>judge</hi>, was evidently liable to objection;
for in the preceding assemblage he had made himself the <hi rend='italic'>accuser</hi>
of Jesus.<note place='foot'>Mr. Salvador admits this: <q>Caiaphas,</q> says he, <q>made himself his accuser.</q>
p. 85.</note> Even before he had seen or heard him, he declared
him to be <hi rend='italic'>deserving of death</hi>. He said to his colleagues, that <q>it
was <hi rend='italic'>expedient</hi> that one man should die for all.</q> John xviii. 14.
<pb n='550'/><anchor id='Pg550'/>
Such being the opinion of Caiaphas, we shall not be surprised,
if he shows partiality.
</p>

<p>
Instead of interrogating Jesus respecting <emph>positive acts done</emph>,
with their circumstances, and respecting <emph>facts personal to himself</emph>,
Caiaphas interrogates him respecting <emph>general facts</emph>, respecting
his disciples (whom it would have been much more simple to
have called as witnesses), and respecting his <emph>doctrine</emph>, which was
a mere abstraction so long as no external acts were the consequence
of it. <q>The high priest then asked Jesus of his disciples
and of his doctrine.</q> John xviii. 19.
</p>

<p>
Jesus answered with dignity: <q>I spake openly to the world;
I ever taught in the synagogue and in the temple, whither the
Jews always resort; and in secret have I said nothing.</q> Ib. 20.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why askest thou me? Ask them which heard me, <hi rend='italic'>what I
have said unto them</hi>; behold, they know what I said.</q> Ib. 21.
</p>

<p>
<q>And when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which
stood by struck Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying,
Answerest thou the high priest so?</q> Ib. 22.
</p>

<p>
Will it here be still said, that this violence was the individual
act of the person who thus struck the accused? I answer, that
on this occasion the fact took place in the presence and under
the eyes of the whole council; and, as the high priest who
presided did not restrain the author of it, I come to the conclusion,
that he became an accomplice, especially when this
violence was committed under the pretence of avenging the
alleged affront to his dignity.
</p>

<p>
But in what respect could the answer of Jesus appear offensive?
<q>If I have spoken evil,</q> said Jesus, <q>bear witness of the
evil; but if well, why smitest thou me?</q><note place='foot'>Ananias, a chief priest, having given orders to strike Paul upon the face, Paul
said to him: <q>God shall smite thee, thou whited wall; for sittest thou to judge me
after the law, and commandest me to be smitten, <hi rend='italic'>contrary to the law</hi>!</q> Acts xxiii. 3.</note> John xviii. 23.
</p>

<p>
There remained no mode of escaping from this dilemma.
They accused Jesus; it was for those, who accused, to prove
their accusation. An accused person is not obliged to criminate
himself. He should have been convicted by proofs; he himself
called for them. Let us see what witnesses were produced
against him.
</p>

<pb n='551'/><anchor id='Pg551'/>

<p>
Section VI.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Witnesses.&mdash;New Interrogatories.&mdash;The
Judge in a Passion</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<q>And the chief priests and all the council sought for witness
against Jesus to put him to death; and found none.</q>
Mark xiv. 55.
</p>

<p>
<q>For many bare <hi rend='italic'>false witness</hi> against him, but their witness
agreed not together.</q> Ib. 56.
</p>

<p>
<q>And there arose certain, and bare false witness against him,
saying, We heard him say, I will destroy this temple that is made
with hands, and within three days I will build another made
without hands.</q> Ib. 57, 58.
</p>

<p>
<q>But (to the same point still) neither so did their witness
agree together.</q> Ib. 59.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Salvador, on this subject, says, p. 87: <q>The two witnesses,
whom St. Matthew and St. Mark charge with <emph>falsehood</emph>,
narrate a discourse which St. John declares to be <emph>true</emph>, so far
as respects the power which Jesus Christ attributed to himself.</q>
</p>

<p>
This alleged contradiction among the Evangelists does not
exist. In the first place, St. Matthew does not say that the
discourse was had by Jesus. In chapter xxvi. 61, he states the
depositions of the witnesses, but saying at the same time that
they were <emph>false witnesses</emph>; and in chapter xxvii. 40, he puts the
same declaration into the mouth of those who insulted Jesus at
the foot of the cross; but he does not put it into the mouth
of Christ. He is in accordance with St. Mark.
</p>

<p>
St. John, chapter ii. 19, makes Jesus speak in these words:
<q>Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy this temple, and
in three days I will raise it up.</q> And St. John adds: <q>He
spake of the temple of his body.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thus Jesus did not say in an affirmative and somewhat
menacing manner, <hi rend='italic'>I will destroy this temple</hi>, as the witnesses
<emph>falsely</emph> assumed; he only said, hypothetically, <hi rend='italic'>Destroy this
temple</hi>, that is to say, suppose this temple should be destroyed,
I will raise it up in three days. Besides, they could not
dissemble, that he referred to a temple altogether different
<pb n='552'/><anchor id='Pg552'/>
from theirs, because he said, I will raise up another in three
days, <hi rend='italic'>which will not be made by the hands of man</hi>.
</p>

<p>
It hence results, at least, that the Jews did not understand
him, for they cried out, <q>Forty and six years was this temple
in building, and wilt thou rear it up in three days?</q>
</p>

<p>
Thus, then, the witnesses did not agree together, and their
declarations had nothing conclusive. Mark xiv. 59. We must,
therefore, look for other proofs.
</p>

<p>
<q>Then the high priest, (we must not forget, that he is still
the accuser,) the high priest stood up in the midst, and asked
Jesus, saying, Answerest thou nothing? what is it, which these
witness against thee? But he held his peace, and answered
nothing.</q> Mark xiv. 60. In truth, since the question was not
concerning the temple of the Jews, but an ideal temple, not made
by the hand of man, and which was alone in the thoughts of Jesus,
the explanation was to be found in the very evidence itself.
</p>

<p>
The high priest continued: <q>I adjure thee, by the living God,
that thou tell us, whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God.</q>
Matt. xxvi. 63. I adjure thee, I call upon thee on oath! a
gross infraction of that rule of morals and jurisprudence, which
forbids our placing an accused person between the danger of
perjury and the fear of inculpating himself, and thus making
his situation more hazardous. The high priest, however, persists,
and says to him: Art thou the Christ, the Son of God?<note place='foot'>Mr. Salvador, in his note to p. 82, admits, that <q>the expression <hi rend='italic'>Son of God</hi> was
in common use among the Hebrews, to signify a man of great wisdom, or of deep piety.</q>
But he adds, <q><hi rend='italic'>It was not in this sense</hi>, that it was used by Jesus Christ; it would
not have caused so strong a sensation.</q> Thus, then, by <hi rend='italic'>construction</hi>, and changing
the words from their usual meaning, an article of accusation is formed against Jesus.</note>
Jesus answered, <hi rend='italic'>Thou hast said</hi>. Matthew xxvi. 64; <hi rend='italic'>I am</hi>.
Mark xiv. 62.
</p>

<p>
<q>Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, <hi rend='italic'>He hath spoken
blasphemy; what further need have we of witnesses</hi>? behold, now
<hi rend='italic'>ye have heard his blasphemy</hi>. What think ye? They answered
and said, He is guilty of death.</q> Matt. xxvi. 66.
</p>

<p>
Let us now compare this scene of violence with the mild
deduction of principles, which we find in the chapter of Mr.
Salvador <hi rend='italic'>On the Administration of Justice</hi>; and let us ask ourselves,
<pb n='553'/><anchor id='Pg553'/>
if, as he alleges, we find a just <emph>application</emph> of them in the
proceedings against Christ?
</p>

<p>
Do we discover here that <emph>respect</emph> of the Hebrew judge towards
the party accused, when we see that Caiaphas permitted him to
be struck, in his presence, <emph>with impunity</emph>?
</p>

<p>
What was this Caiaphas, at once an accuser and judge?<note place='foot'>That is, he usurped the functions of a judge; for we shall see, in the next
section, that the <hi rend='italic'>Council</hi> of the Jews had not jurisdiction of capital cases.</note> A
passionate man, and too much resembling the odious portrait
which the historian Josephus has given us of him!<note place='foot'>Antiq. Judaic. lib. 18, cap. 3 &amp; 6.</note> A judge, who
was irritated to such a degree, that he rent his clothes; who imposed
upon the accused a most solemn oath, and who gave to his
answers the criminal character, that <hi rend='italic'>he had spoken</hi> blasphemy!
And, from that moment, he wanted no more witnesses, notwithstanding
the law required them. He would not have an inquiry,
which he perceived would be insufficient; he attempts to supply
it by captious questions. He is desirous of having him condemned
<emph>upon his own declaration alone</emph>, (interpreted, too, as he chooses to
understand it,) though that was forbidden by the laws of the
Hebrews! And, in the midst of a most violent transport of
passion, this accuser himself, a high priest, who means to speak
in the name of the living God, is the first to pass sentence of
death, and carries with him the opinions of the rest!
</p>

<p>
In this hideous picture I cannot recognise that justice of the
Hebrews, of which Mr. Salvador has given so fine a view in <emph>his
theory</emph>!
</p>

<p>
Section VII.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Subsequent Acts of Violence</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Immediately after this kind of sacerdotal verdict rendered
against Jesus, the acts of violence and insults recommenced
with increased strength; the fury of the judge must have communicated
itself to the bystanders. St. Matthew says: <q>Then
did they spit in his face, and buffeted him; and others smote
him with the palms of their hands, saying, Prophesy unto us,
thou Christ; who is he that smote thee?</q> Matt. xxvi. 67, 68.
</p>

<pb n='554'/><anchor id='Pg554'/>

<p>
Mr. Salvador does not contest the truth of this ill treatment.
In page 88 he says, <q>It was contrary to the spirit of the Hebrew
law, and that it was not according to the order of nature, that a
senate composed of the most respectable men of a nation,&mdash;that
a senate, which might perhaps be mistaken, but which thought
it was acting mildly, should have permitted such outrages
against him whose life it held in its own hands. The writers
who have transmitted these details to us, not having been present
themselves at the trial, were disposed to overcharge the picture,
either on account of their own feelings, or to throw upon their
judges a greater odium.</q>
</p>

<p>
I repeat; this ill treatment was entirely contrary to the spirit
of the law. And what do I want more, since my object is to
make prominent <emph>all the violations of law</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<q>It is not in nature to see a body, which respects itself,
authorize such attempts.</q> But of what consequence is that,
when the fact is established? <q>The historians, it is said, were
not present at the trial.</q> But was Mr. Salvador there present
himself, so that he could give a flat denial of their statements?
And when even an able writer, who was not an eye-witness,
relates the same events after the lapse of more than eighteen
centuries, he ought at least to bring opposing evidence, if he
would impeach that of contemporaries; who, if they were not
in the very hall of the council, were certainly on the spot, in
the vicinity, perhaps in the court yard, inquiring anxiously of
every thing that was happening to the man whose disciples they
were.<note place='foot'>Peter followed him afar off unto the high priest's palace, and went in and sat
with the servants to see the end. Matt. xxvi. 58. So also the young man spoken
of by St. Mark, xiv. 51: And there followed him a certain young man, &amp;c.</note> Besides, the learned author whom I am combating says,
in the outset (p. 81), <q>it is from the Gospels themselves that he
will take all his facts.</q> He must then take the whole together,
as well those which go to condemn, as those which are in palliation
or excuse.
</p>

<p>
Those gross insults, those inhuman acts of violence, even if
they are to be cast upon the servants of the high priest and the
persons in his train, do not excuse those individuals, who, when
they took upon themselves the authority of judges, were bound
<pb n='555'/><anchor id='Pg555'/>
at the same time to throw around him all the protection of the
law. Caiaphas, too, was culpable as the master of the house
(for every thing took place in his house), even if he should not
be responsible as high priest and president of the council for
having permitted excesses, which, indeed were but too much in
accordance with the rage he had himself displayed upon the
bench.
</p>

<p>
These outrages, which would be inexcusable even towards a
man irrevocably condemned to punishment, were the more
criminal towards Jesus, because, legally and judicially speaking,
there had not yet been any sentence properly passed against
him according to the public law of the country; as we shall
see in the following section, which will deserve the undivided
attention of the reader.
</p>

<p>
Section VIII.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Position of the Jews in respect
to the Romans</hi>.
</p>

<p>
We must not forget, <emph>that Judea was a conquered country</emph>. After
the death of Herod&mdash;most inappropriately surnamed <hi rend='italic'>the Great</hi>&mdash;Augustus
had confirmed his last will, by which that king of the
Jews had arranged the division of his dominions between <emph>his</emph>
two sons: but Augustus did not continue their title of <hi rend='italic'>king</hi>,
which their father had borne.
</p>

<p>
Archeläus, on whom Judea devolved, having been recalled on
account of his cruelties, the territory, which was at first intrusted
to his command, was united to the province of Syria.
(<hi rend='italic'>Josephus</hi>, Antiq. Jud. lib. 17, cap. 15.)
</p>

<p>
Augustus then appointed particular officers for Judea.
Tiberius did the same; and at the time of which we are
speaking, Pilate was one of those officers. (<hi rend='italic'>Josephus</hi>, lib. 18,
cap. 3 &amp; 8.)
</p>

<p>
Some have considered Pilate as governor, by title, and have
given him the Latin appellation, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Præses</foreign>, president or governor.
But they have mistaken the force of the word. Pilate was one
of those public officers, who were called by the Romans,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>procuratores Cæsaris</foreign>, Imperial procurators.
<pb n='556'/><anchor id='Pg556'/>
With this title of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>procurator</foreign>, he was placed under the
superior authority of the governor of Syria, the true <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>præses</foreign>, or
governor of that province, of which Judea was then only one of
the dependencies.
</p>

<p>
To the governor (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>præses</foreign>) peculiarly belonged the right of
taking cognizance of <emph>capital</emph> cases.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Crimine</hi> præsidis cognitio est. Cujas, xix. Observ. 13.</note> The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>procurator</foreign>, on the
contrary, had, for his principal duty, nothing but the collection
of the revenue, and the trial of revenue causes. But the right
of taking cognizance of <emph>capital</emph> cases did, in some instances,
belong to certain <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>procurators</foreign>, who were sent into small provinces
to fill the places of governors (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vice præsides</foreign>), as appears
clearly from the Roman laws.<note place='foot'>Procurator Cæsaris <hi rend='italic'>fungens vice præsidis potest cognoscere de causis criminalibus</hi>.
Godefroy, in his note (letter S) upon the 3rd law of the Code, <hi rend='italic'>Ubi causæ fiscales</hi>, &amp;c.
And he cites several others, which I have verified, and which are most precise to
the same effect. See particularly the 4th law of the Code, <hi rend='italic'>Ad leg. fab. de plag.</hi>,
and the 2nd law of the Code, <hi rend='italic'>De Pœnis</hi>.</note> Such was <hi rend='italic'>Pilate</hi> at Jerusalem.<note place='foot'>Procuratoribus Cæsaris data est jurisdictio in causis fiscalibus pecuniariis, non
in criminalibus, nisi quum fungebantur <hi rend='italic'>vice præsidum</hi>; ut Pontius Pilatus fuit procurator
Cæsaris <hi rend='italic'>vice præsidis</hi> in Syria. Cujas, Observ. xix. 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Jews, placed in this political position&mdash;notwithstanding
they were left in the enjoyment of their civil laws, the public
exercise of their religion, and many things merely relating to
their police and municipal regulations&mdash;the Jews, I say, had not
the <emph>power of life and death</emph>; this was a principal attribute of
sovereignty, which the Romans always took great care to
reserve to themselves, even if they neglected other things.
<hi rend='italic'>Apud Romanos, jus valet gladii; cætera transmittuntur</hi>. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tacit</hi>.
</p>

<p>
What then was the right of the Jewish authorities in regard
to Jesus? Without doubt the scribes, and their friends the
Pharisees, might well have been alarmed, as a body and
individually, at the preaching and success of Jesus; they
might be concerned for their worship; and they might have
interrogated the man respecting his creed and his doctrines,&mdash;they
might have made a kind of preparatory proceeding,&mdash;they
might have declared, in point of fact, that those doctrines,
which threatened their own, were contrary to their law, as
understood by themselves.
</p>

<pb n='557'/><anchor id='Pg557'/>

<p>
But that law, although it had not undergone any alteration
as to the affairs of religion, had no longer any coercive power
as to the external or civil regulations of society. In vain would
they have undertaken to pronounce sentence of death under the
circumstances of the case of Jesus; the council of the Jews had
not the power to pass a <emph>sentence of death</emph>; it only would have
had power to make <emph>an accusation</emph> against him before the
governor, or his deputy, and then deliver him over to be tried
by him.
</p>

<p>
Let us distinctly establish this point; for here I entirely
differ in opinion from Mr. Salvador. According to him,
(p. 88), <q>the Jews had <emph>reserved the power of trying, according
to their law</emph>; but it was in the hands of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>procurator</foreign> alone,
that the executive power was vested; every culprit must be put
to death by <emph>his</emph> consent, in order that the senate should not
have the means of reaching persons that were sold to foreigners.</q>
</p>

<p>
No; the Jews had not reserved <emph>the right of passing sentence
of death</emph>. This right had been transferred to the Romans by
the very act of conquest; and this was not merely that the
senate should not have the means of reaching persons who were
sold to foreign countries; but it was done, in order that the
conqueror might be able to reach those individuals who should
become <emph>impatient of the yoke</emph>; it was, in short, for the equal
protection of all, as all had become Roman subjects; and to
Rome alone belonged the highest judicial power, which is the
principal attribute of sovereignty. Pilate, as the representative
of Cæsar in Judea, was not merely an agent of the <emph>executive
authority</emph>, which would have left the <emph>judiciary</emph> and <emph>legislative</emph>
power in the hands of the conquered people&mdash;he was not simply
an officer appointed to give an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>exequatur</foreign> or mere approval
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>visa</foreign>) to sentences passed by <emph>another authority</emph>, the <emph>authority of
the Jews</emph>. When the matter in question was a <emph>capital</emph> case,
the Roman authorities not only ordered the <emph>execution</emph> of a
sentence, but also took cognizance (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cognitio</foreign>) of the crime; it
had the right of jurisdiction <hi rend='italic'>à priori</hi>, and that of <emph>passing
judgment in the last resort</emph>. If Pilate himself had not had this
power by special delegation, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vice præsidis</foreign>, it was vested in the
governor, within whose territorial jurisdiction the case occurred;
<pb n='558'/><anchor id='Pg558'/>
but in any event we hold it to be clear, that the Jews had lost
the right of <emph>condemning to death</emph> any person whatever, not only
so far as respects the <emph>execution</emph> but the <emph>passing</emph> of the sentence.
This is one of the best settled points in the provincial law of
the Romans.
</p>

<p>
The Jews were not ignorant of this; for when they went
before Pilate, to ask of him the condemnation of Jesus, they
themselves declared, that it was not permitted to them to put
any person to death: <q>It is not lawful for us to put any man to
death.</q> John xviii. 31.
</p>

<p>
Here I am happy to be able to support myself by the opinion
of a very respectable authority, the celebrated Loiseau, in his
treatise on <hi rend='italic'>Seigneuries</hi>, in the chapter on the administration of
<hi rend='italic'>justice belonging to cities</hi>. <q>In truth,</q> says he, <q>there is
some evidence, that the <emph>police</emph>, in which the people had the
sole interest, was administered by officers of the people; but I
know not upon what were founded the concessions of power to
some cities of France to exercise criminal jurisdiction; nor why
the Ordinance of Moulins left that to them rather than civil
cases; for the criminal jurisdiction is the <emph>right of the sword</emph>, the
<hi rend='italic'>merum imperium</hi>, or absolute sovereignty. Accordingly, by the
Roman law, the administration of justice was so far prohibited
to the officers of cities, that they could not punish even by a
simple fine. <emph>Thus it is doubtless that we must understand</emph> that
passage of the Gospel, where the Jews say to Pilate, <hi rend='italic'>It is not
lawful for us to put any man to death</hi>; for, after they were subjected
to the Romans, they had not jurisdiction of crimes.</q>
</p>

<p>
Let us now follow Jesus to the presence of Pilate.
</p>

<p>
Section IX.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Accusation made before Pilate</hi>.
</p>

<p>
At this point I must entreat the particular attention of the
reader. The irregularities and acts of violence, which I have
hitherto remarked upon, are nothing in comparison with the
unbridled fury, which is about to display itself before the <emph>Roman
Judge</emph>, in order to extort from him, against his own conviction,
a sentence of death.
</p>

<pb n='559'/><anchor id='Pg559'/>

<p>
<q>And straightway in the morning the chief priests held a
consultation with the elders, and scribes, and the whole council,
and bound Jesus, and carried him away, and delivered him to
Pilate.</q> Mark xv. 1.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>As soon as the morning was come</hi>; for, as I have observed
already, every thing which had been done thus far against Jesus
was done <emph>during the night</emph>.
</p>

<p>
They then led Jesus from Caiaphas unto the Hall of Judgment
of Pilate.<note place='foot'><q>To carry one from Caiaphas to Pilate</q> has since become a proverb.</note> It was early; and they themselves went not
into the judgment hall, lest <hi rend='italic'>they should be defiled</hi>; but that
they might eat the passover. John xviii. 28.
</p>

<p>
Singular scrupulousness! and truly worthy of the Pharisees!
They were afraid of <emph>defiling themselves on the day of the passover</emph>
by entering <emph>the house of</emph> a heathen! And yet, the same day,
only some hours before presenting themselves to Pilate, they
had, in contempt of their own law, committed the outrage of
<emph>holding a council</emph> and deliberating upon <emph>an accusation of a capital
crime</emph>.
</p>

<p>
As they would not enter, <q>Pilate went out to them.</q> John
xviii. 29. Now observe his language. He did not say to them,
<hi rend='italic'>Where is the sentence you have passed</hi>; as he must have done, if
he was only to give them his simple <hi rend='italic'>exequatur</hi>, or permission to
execute the sentence; but he takes up the matter from the
beginning, as would be done by one who had <emph>plenary jurisdiction</emph>;
and he says to them: What accusation bring ye against
this man?
</p>

<p>
They answered, with their accustomed haughtiness: If he
were not <hi rend='italic'>a malefactor</hi> we would not have delivered him up to
thee. John xviii. 30. They wished to have it understood, that,
being a question of <hi rend='italic'>blasphemy</hi>, it was the <hi rend='italic'>cause of their religion</hi>,
which they could appreciate better than any others could.
Pilate, then, would have been under the necessity of believing
them <emph>on their word</emph>. But this Roman, indignant at their proposed
course of proceeding, which would have restricted his
jurisdiction by making him the passive instrument of the
wishes of the Jews, answered them in an ironical manner:
<pb n='560'/><anchor id='Pg560'/>
Well, since you say he has sinned against your law, take him
yourselves and judge him according to your law. John xviii. 31.
This was an absolute mystification to them, for they knew their
own want of power to condemn him to death. But they were
obliged to yield the point, and to submit to Pilate himself their
<emph>articles of accusation</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Now what were the grounds of this accusation? Were they
<emph>the same</emph> which had hitherto been alleged against Jesus&mdash;the
charge of <emph>blasphemy</emph>&mdash;which was the only one brought forward
by Caiaphas before the council of the Jews? Not at all;
despairing of obtaining from the Roman judge a sentence of
<emph>death</emph> for a <emph>religious</emph> quarrel, which was of no interest to the
Romans,<note place='foot'>Lysias thus wrote to Felix the Governor, in relation to Paul: Whom I perceived
to be accused of questions of their law, but to have nothing laid to his charge
worthy of death or bonds. Acts xxiii. 29.</note> they suddenly changed their plan; they abandoned
their first accusation, the charge of blasphemy, and substituted
for it a <emph>political</emph> accusation, an <emph>offence against the state</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Here we have the very crisis, or essential incident, of the
passion; and that which makes the heaviest accusation of
guilt on the part of the informers against Jesus. For, being
fully bent on destroying him in any manner whatever, they no
longer exhibited themselves as the avengers of <emph>their religion</emph>,
which was alleged to have been outraged, or of their worship,
which it was pretended was threatened; but, ceasing to appear
as Jews, in order to affect sentiments belonging to a foreign
nation, those hypocrites held out the appearance of being concerned
for the interests of <emph>Rome</emph>; they accused their own
countryman of an intention to restore the kingdom of Jerusalem,
to make himself <emph>king</emph> of the <emph>Jews</emph>, and to make an insurrection
of the people against their conquerors. Let us hear them speak
for themselves:
</p>

<p>
<q>And they began to <hi rend='italic'>accuse</hi> him, saying, We found this fellow
perverting the nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Cæsar,
saying, that he himself is Christ a <hi rend='italic'>king</hi>.</q> Luke xxiii. 2.
</p>

<p>
What a calumny! Jesus forbidding to give tribute to Cæsar!
when he had answered the Pharisees themselves, in presence of
the whole people, by showing them the image of Cæsar upon a
<pb n='561'/><anchor id='Pg561'/>
Roman piece of money, and saying, Give unto Cæsar the things
which are Cæsar's. But this accusation was one mode of interesting
Pilate in respect to his jurisdiction; for, as an imperial
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>procurator</foreign>, he was specially to superintend the collection of the
revenue. The second branch of the accusation still more directly
affected the sovereignty of the Romans: <q>He holds himself up
for a <hi rend='italic'>king</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
The accusation having thus assumed a character purely <emph>political</emph>,
Pilate thought he must pay attention to it. <q>Then Pilate
entered into the judgment hall,</q> (the place where justice was
administered,) and having <emph>summoned Jesus to appear</emph> before him,
he proceeds to his Examination, and says to him: <q>Art thou the
king of the Jews?</q> John xviii. 33.
</p>

<p>
This question, so different from those which had been addressed
to him at the house of the high priest, appears to have excited
the astonishment of Jesus; and, in his turn, he asked Pilate:
<q>Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others tell it thee of
me?</q> Ib. 24. In reality, Jesus was desirous of knowing, first
of all, the authors of this new accusation&mdash;Is this an accusation
brought against me by the <emph>Romans</emph> or by the <emph>Jews</emph>?
</p>

<p>
Pilate replied to him&mdash;<q>Am I a Jew? Thine own nation
and the chief priests have delivered thee unto me; what hast
thou done?</q> Ib. 35.
</p>

<p>
All the particulars of this procedure are important; I cannot
too often repeat the remark, that in no part of the transactions
before Pilate is there any question at all respecting a previous
sentence, a judgment already passed&mdash;a judgment, the execution
of which was the only subject of consideration; it was a case of
a capital accusation; but an accusation which was then just
beginning; they were about the preliminary <emph>interrogatories</emph> put
to the accused, and Pilate says to him, <q>What hast thou done?</q>
</p>

<p>
Jesus, seeing by the explanation what was the source of the
<emph>prejudging</emph> of his case, and knowing the secret thoughts which
predominated in making the accusation, and that his enemies
wanted to arrive at the same end by an artifice, answered Pilate&mdash;<q><emph>My
kingdom is not of this world</emph>; if my kingdom were of this
world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered
to the Jews;</q> (we see, in fact, that Jesus had forbidden
<pb n='562'/><anchor id='Pg562'/>
his people to resist) but, he added, <q>now is my kingdom not
from hence.</q> John xviii. 36.
</p>

<p>
This answer of Jesus is very remarkable; it became the foundation
of his religion, and the pledge of its universality, because
it detached it from the interests of all governments. It rests not
merely in assertion, in doctrine; it was given in <emph>justification</emph>, in
<emph>defence</emph> against the accusation of intending to make himself
<hi rend='italic'>King of the Jews</hi>. Indeed, if Jesus had affected a <emph>temporal</emph> royal
authority, if there had been the least attempt, on his part, to
usurp <emph>the power of Cæsar</emph>, he would have been guilty of treason
in the eyes of the magistrate. But, by answering twice, <hi rend='italic'>my
kingdom is not of this world</hi>, my kingdom <hi rend='italic'>is not from hence</hi>, his
justification was complete.
</p>

<p>
Pilate, however, persisted and said to him: <q>Art thou a king
then?</q> Jesus replied, Thou sayest that I am a king. To this
end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I
should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the
truth heareth my voice. John xviii. 37.
</p>

<p>
Pilate then said to him: <hi rend='italic'>What is the truth?</hi>
</p>

<p>
This question proves, that Pilate had not a very clear idea of
what Jesus called <hi rend='italic'>the truth</hi>. He perceived nothing in it but
<emph>ideology</emph>; and, satisfied with having said (less in the manner of a
question than of an exclamation) <q><hi rend='italic'>What is the truth</hi>,</q> he went
on to the Jews (who remained outside) and said to them, <q><hi rend='italic'>I
find in him no fault at all</hi>.</q> John xviii. 38.
</p>

<p>
Here, then, we see Jesus absolved from the accusation by the
declaration of the Roman judge himself.
</p>

<p>
But the accusers, persisting still farther, added&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He stirreth
up the people, teaching</hi> throughout all Jewry, beginning from
Galilee to this place.</q> Luke xxiii. 5.
</p>

<p>
<q>He stirreth up the people!</q> This is a charge of sedition;
and for Pilate. But observe, it was <emph>by the doctrine which he
teaches</emph>; these words comprehend the real complaint of the Jews.
To them it was equivalent to saying&mdash;He <emph>teaches</emph> the people, he
instructs them, he enlightens them; he preaches <emph>new doctrines</emph>
which are not <emph>ours</emph>. <q>He stirs up the people!</q> This, in their
months signified&mdash;the people hear him willingly; the people
follow and become attached to him; for he preaches a doctrine
<pb n='563'/><anchor id='Pg563'/>
that is friendly and consolatory to the people; he unmasks our
pride, our avarice, our insatiable spirit of domination!
</p>

<p>
Pilate, however, does not appear to have attached much importance
to this new turn given to the accusation; but he here
betrays a weakness. He heard the word <hi rend='italic'>Galilee</hi>; and he makes
that the occasion of shifting off the responsibility upon another
public officer, and seizes the occasion with avidity. He says to
Jesus&mdash;you are a <hi rend='italic'>Galilean</hi> then? and, upon the answer being in
the affirmative, considering Jesus as belonging to the jurisdiction
of Herod-Antipas, who, by the good pleasure of Cæsar, was then
tetrarch of Galilee, he sent him to Herod. Luke xxiii. 6, 7.
</p>

<p>
But Herod, who, as St. Luke says, had been long desirous of
<emph>seeing Jesus</emph> and had hoped to see some  miracle  done by him,
after satisfying an idle curiosity and putting several questions to
him, which Jesus did not deign to answer,&mdash;Herod, notwithstanding
the presence of the priests, (who had not yet gone off,
but stood there with their scribes,) and notwithstanding the pertinacity
with which they continued to accuse Jesus, perceiving
nothing but what was merely chimerical in the <emph>accusation of
being a king</emph>, made a mockery of the affair, and sent Jesus back
to Pilate, <emph>after having arrayed him in a gorgeous robe</emph>, in order to
show that he thought this pretended royalty was a subject of
ridicule rather than of apprehensions. Luke xxiii. 8, &amp;c., and
De Sacy. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Section X.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Last Efforts before Pilate</hi>.
</p>

<p>
No person, then, was willing to condemn Jesus; neither
Herod, who only made the case a subject of mockery, nor Pilate,
who had openly declared that he found nothing criminal
in him.
</p>

<p>
But the hatred of the priests was not disarmed&mdash;so far from
it, that the chief priests, with a numerous train of their partisans,
returned to Pilate with a determination to force him to
a decision.
</p>

<p>
The unfortunate Pilate, reviewing his proceedings in their
presence, said to them again: <q>Ye have brought this man unto
me as one that perverteth the people&mdash;and, behold, I, having
<pb n='564'/><anchor id='Pg564'/>
examined him before you, <hi rend='italic'>have found no fault in this man
touching those things whereof ye accuse him</hi>: No, nor yet
Herod; for I sent you to him, and lo, <hi rend='italic'>nothing worthy of death is
done unto him</hi>. I will therefore chastise him and release him.</q>
Luke xxiii. 14, 15.
</p>

<p>
After <q>chastising</q> him! And was not this a piece of
cruelty, when he considered him to be innocent?<note place='foot'>Gerhard makes the following unanswerable dilemma upon this point. <q>Be
consistent with thyself, Pilate; for, if Christ is innocent, why dost thou not send
him away acquitted? And if thou believest him deserving of chastisement with
rods, why dost thou proclaim him to be innocent?</q> <hi rend='italic'>Gerh. Harm.</hi> ch. 193, p. 1889.</note> But this
was an act of condescension by which Pilate hoped to quiet the
rage with which he saw they were agitated.
</p>

<p>
<q>Then Pilate therefore took Jesus and scourged him.</q> John
xix. 1. And, supposing that he had done enough to disarm
their fury, he exhibited him to them in that pitiable condition;
saying to them at the same time, Behold the man! <hi rend='italic'>Ecce homo</hi>.
John xix. 5.
</p>

<p>
Now, in my turn, I say, here is indeed a decree of Pilate,
and an unjust decree; but it is not the pretended decree alleged
to have been made by the Jews. It is a decision wholly different;
an unjust decision, it is true; but sufficient to avail as <emph>a legal
bar</emph> to any new proceedings against Jesus for the same act.
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non bis in idem</foreign>, no man shall be put twice in jeopardy, &amp;c. is
a maxim, which has come down to us from the Romans.
</p>

<p>
Accordingly, <q>from thenceforth Pilate sought to <emph>release</emph>
Jesus.</q> John xix. 12.
</p>

<p>
Here, now, observe the deep perfidy of his accusers. <q>If
thou let this man go, thou art not Cæsar's friend; whosoever
maketh himself a <emph>king</emph> speaketh against Cæsar.</q> Ib.
</p>

<p>
It does not appear that Pilate was malignant; we see all the
efforts he had made at different times to save Jesus. But he
was a <emph>public officer</emph>, and was attached to <emph>his office</emph>; he was
intimidated by the outcry which called in question his <emph>fidelity to
the emperor</emph>; he was afraid of a <emph>dismissal</emph>: and he yielded. He
immediately reascended the judgment-seat; (Matt. xxvii. 19),
and, as new light had thus come upon him, he proceeded to
make a second decree!
</p>

<pb n='565'/><anchor id='Pg565'/>

<p>
But being for a moment stopped by the voice of his own
conscience, and by the advice which his terrified wife sent to
him&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Have thou nothing to do with that just man</hi></q>&mdash;(Matt.
xxvii. 19)&mdash;he made his last effort, by attempting to influence
the populace to accept of Barabbas instead of Jesus. <q>But the
chief priests moved the people, that he should rather release
Barabbas unto them.</q> Mark xv. 11. Barabbas! a murderer!
an assassin!
</p>

<p>
Pilate spoke to them again: <hi rend='italic'>What will ye then, that I should
do with Jesus?</hi> And they cried out, <hi rend='italic'>Away with him, crucify
him</hi>. Pilate still persisted: <hi rend='italic'>Shall I crucify your king?</hi> thus
using terms of raillery, in order to disarm them. But here
showing themselves to be more truly Roman than Pilate himself,
the chief priests hypocritically answered: <hi rend='italic'>We have no king
but Cæsar.</hi> John xix. 15.
</p>

<p>
The outcry was renewed&mdash;Crucify him, crucify him! And
the clamour became more and more threatening; <q>and the
voices of them and of the chief priests prevailed.</q> Luke
xxiii. 23.
</p>

<p>
At length Pilate, <hi rend='italic'>being desirous of pleasing the multitude</hi>,
proceeds to speak. But can we call it a legal adjudication, a
<emph>judgment</emph>, that he is about to pronounce? Is he, at the moment,
in that free state of mind which is necessary for a judge, who is
about to pass a <emph>sentence of death</emph>? What new witnesses, what
proofs have been brought forward to change his conviction and
opinion, which had been so energetically declared, of the innocence
of Jesus?
</p>

<p>
<q>When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that
rather a tumult was made, he took water and washed his hands
before the multitude, saying, <hi rend='italic'>I am innocent of the blood of this
just person</hi>; see ye to it. Matt. xxvii. 24. And Pilate gave
sentence, that it should be as they required. Luke xxiii.
24. And he delivered him to them to be crucified.</q> Matt.
xxvii. 26.
</p>

<p>
Well mayest thou wash thy hands, Pilate, stained as they are
with innocent blood! Thou hast authorised the act in thy
weakness; thou art not less culpable, than if thou hadst sacrificed
him through wickedness! All generations, down to our
<pb n='566'/><anchor id='Pg566'/>
own time, have repeated that the <hi rend='italic'>Just One</hi> suffered <hi rend='italic'>under
Pontius Pilate</hi>. Thy name has remained in history, to serve
for the instruction of all public men, all pusillanimous judges,
in order to hold up to them the shame of <emph>yielding contrary to
one's own convictions</emph>. The populace, in its fury, made an outcry
at the foot of thy judgment-seat, where, perhaps, thou
thyself didst not sit securely! But of what importance was
that? Thy <emph>duty</emph> spoke out; and in such a case, better would
it be to suffer death, than to inflict it on another.<note place='foot'><p>We will cite here the words of one of the finest laws of the Romans: Vanæ
voces populi non sunt audiendæ, quando aut noxium crimine absolvi, aut innocentum
condemnari desiderant&mdash;The idle clamour of the populace is not to be regarded,
when they call for a guilty man to be acquitted, or an innocent one to be condemned.
<hi rend='italic'>Law 12, Code de Pœnis</hi>. Pilate might also have read in Horace: Justum et tenacem, &amp;c.&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<q>The man in conscious virtue bold,<lb/>
Who dares his secret purpose hold,<lb/>
Unshaken hears the crowd's tumultuous cries,<lb/>
And the impetuous <hi rend='italic'>tyrant's</hi> angry brow defies.</q>
</p></note>
</p>

<p>
We will now come to a conclusion.
</p>

<p>
The <emph>proof</emph> that Jesus was not, as Mr. Salvador maintains,
put to death for the crime of blasphemy or sacrilege, and for
having preached a new religious worship in contravention of
the Mosaic law, results from <emph>the very sentence</emph> pronounced by
Pilate; a sentence, in pursuance of which he was led to execution
by Roman soldiers.
</p>

<p>
There was among the Romans a custom, which we borrowed
from their jurisprudence, and which is still followed, of placing
over the head of a condemned criminal a writing containing <emph>an
extract from his sentence</emph>, in order that the public might know
<emph>for what crime</emph> he was condemned. This was the reason why
Pilate put on the cross a label, on which he had written these
words: <hi rend='italic'>Jesus Nazarenus Rex Judæorum</hi>, (Jesus of Nazareth,
King of the Jews), which has since been denoted by the initials
J. N. R. J. This was the alleged cause of his condemnation.
St. Mark says&mdash;<q>And the superscription of his <emph>accusation</emph> was
written over&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>The King of the Jews</hi>.</q> Mark xv. 26.
</p>

<p>
This inscription was first in <hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>, which was the legal language
of the <hi rend='italic'>Roman</hi> judge; and it was repeated in <hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi> and
<pb n='567'/><anchor id='Pg567'/>
<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>, in order to be understood by the people of the nation and
by foreigners.
</p>

<p>
The chief priests, whose indefatigable hatred did not overlook
the most minute details, being apprehensive that people would
take it to be literally a fact affirmed, that Jesus <hi rend='italic'>was the King of
the Jews</hi>, said to Pilate: <q>Write not <hi rend='italic'>King of the Jews</hi>, but that
<hi rend='italic'>he said</hi> I am king of the Jews.</q> But Pilate answered: <q>What I
have written I have written.</q> John xix. 21, 22.
</p>

<p>
This is a conclusive answer to one of the last assertions of Mr.
Salvador, (p. 88,) that <q>the Roman Pilate signed the sentence;</q>
by which he always means that Pilate did nothing but sign a
sentence, which he supposes to have been passed by the Sanhedrim;
but in this he is mistaken. Pilate did not merely <emph>sign</emph>
the sentence, or decree, but <emph>drew it up</emph>; and, when his draft was
objected to by the priests, he still adhered to it, saying, what I
have written shall remain as written.
</p>

<p>
Here then we see the true cause of the condemnation of
Jesus! Here we have the <q><hi rend='italic'>judicial and legal proof</hi>.</q> Jesus
was the victim of a <emph>political</emph> accusation! He was put to death
for the imaginary crime of having aimed at the power of Cæsar,
by calling himself <hi rend='italic'>King of the Jews</hi>! Absurd accusation; which
Pilate never believed, and which the chief priests and the Pharisees
themselves did not believe. For they were not authorized
to arrest Jesus on that account; it was a new, and totally different,
accusation from that which they first planned&mdash;a sudden
accusation of the moment, when they saw that Pilate was but
little affected by their <emph>religious</emph> zeal, and they found it necessary
to arouse <emph>his zeal for</emph> Cæsar.
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>If thou let this man go, thou art not Cæsar's friend!</hi></q> This
alarming language has too often, since that time, reverberated
in the ears of timid judges, who, like Pilate, have rendered themselves
criminal by delivering up victims through want of firmness,
whom they would never have condemned, if they had
listened to the voice of their own consciences.
</p>

<p>
Let us now recapitulate the case, as I have considered it from
the beginning.
</p>

<p>
Is it not evident, contrary to the conclusion of Mr. Salvador,
that Jesus, considered merely as <emph>a simple citizen</emph>, was not tried and
<pb n='568'/><anchor id='Pg568'/>
sentenced either <emph>according to law</emph>, or <emph>agreeably to the forms of
legal proceedings then existing</emph>?
</p>

<p>
God, according to his eternal design, might permit the just to
suffer by the malice of men; but he also intended, that this
should at least happen by a disregard of all laws, and by a violation
of all established rules, in order that the entire contempt of
forms should stand as the first warning of the violation of law.
</p>

<p>
Let us not be surprised then, that in another part of his work,
Mr. Salvador (who, it is gratifying to observe, discusses his subject
dispassionately) expresses some regret in speaking of the
<q><hi rend='italic'>unfortunate sentence against Jesus</hi>.</q> Vol. i. p. 59. He has
wished to excuse the Hebrews; but, one of that nation, in
giving utterance to the feelings of his heart, still says&mdash;in language
which I took from his own mouth, <q>We should be very
cautious of condemning him at this day.</q>
</p>

<p>
I pass over the excesses which followed the order of Pilate;
as, the violence shown to Simon, the Cyrenian, who was made
in some degree a sharer in the punishment, by being compelled
to carry the cross; the injurious treatment which attended the
victim to the place of the sacrifice, and even to the cross, where
Jesus still prayed for his brethren and his executioners!
</p>

<p>
To the heathen themselves I would say&mdash;You, who have gloried
in the death of Socrates, how much must you be struck with
wonder at that of Jesus! Ye, censors of the Areopagus, how
could you undertake to excuse the Synagogue, and justify the
sentence of the Hall of Judgment? Philosophy herself has not
hesitated to proclaim, and we may repeat with her&mdash;<q>Yes, if the
life and death of <hi rend='italic'>Socrates</hi> were those of a sage, the life and death
of <hi rend='italic'>Jesus</hi> were those of a divinity.</q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
